Epitaph
ERIC AMBLER

I arrived in St Gatien from Nice on Tuesday, the 14th
of August. I was arrested at 11.45 a.m. on Thursday, the
16th, by an agent de police and an inspector in plain
clothes and taken to the Commissariat.

For several kilometres on the way from Toulon to La
Ciotat the railway runs very near to the coast. As the train
, rushes between the innumerable short tunnels through
which this section of the line has been built, you catch
quick glimpses of the sea below, dazzlingly blue, of red
; rocks, of white houses among pine woods. It is as if you
were watching a magic-lantern show with highly coloured
slides and an impatient operator. The eye has no time to
absorb details. Even if you know of St Gatien and are
looking for it, you can see nothing of it but the bright
red roof and the pale yellow stucco walls of the Hotel de
la Reserve.

The hotel stands on the highest point of the headland
and the terrace runs along the south side of the building.
Beyond the terrace there is a sheer drop of about fifteen
metres. The branches of pines growing below brush the
pillars of the balustrade. But farther out towards the point
the level rises again. There are gashes of red rock in the
dry green scrub. A few windswept tamarisks wave their
tortured branches in silhouette against the intense ultra-
marine blue of the sea. Occasionally a white cloud of spray
starts up from the rocks below.


9


The village of St Gatien sprawls in the lee of the sma
headland on which the hotel stands. The walls of the hous<
are, like those of most other Mediterranean fishing village;
coated with either white, egg-shell blue, or rose-pin
washes. Rocky heights, whose pine-clad slopes meet th
seashore on the opposite side of the bay, shelter the minia
ture harbour from the mistral that sometimes blow
strongly from the northwest. The population is sevei
hundred and forty-three. The majority depend for thei
livelihoods on fishing. There are two cafes, thre<

bistros, seven shops and, farther round the bay. a nolicf
station. J w


But from the end of the terrace where I was sitting tha
mommg the village and the police station were out of sighi
pe day was already warm and the cicadas were dronini
m the terraced gardens at the side of the hotel. By movin
my h<»d slightly I could see, through the balustrade, th!
mall Reserve bathing beach. Two large coloured sunshade:
were planted in the sand. From under one of them tw (
pairs of legs protruded, a woman’s and a man’s Thei
looked young and very brown. A faint murmur of voice-
told me that there were other guests out of sight in the
shady part of the beach. The gardener, his head and
shoulders sheltered from the sun by a huge straw hat, was
painting a blue band round the gunwale of an upturned

the headf^ 0n , tr ® stles ; A mot °rboat was coming round
&e hea^md on the far side of the bay and making for the

beadi As it came nearer, I could distinguish the thin
lanky figure of Roche, the manager of the Reserve droon-
mg over the tiller. The other man in the boat was one of

Scf dZ^JT ** ViUage - The ? would have been out
mice dawn. Maybe we would have red mullet for lunch

Out a. sea a Nederland-Lloyd liner moved on


from Marseilles to Villefranche. It was all very good and
peaceful.

I was thinking that tomorrow night I would have to pack
my suitcase and that early Saturday morning I would have
to go by bus into Toulon and catch the train for Paris.
The train would be near Arles in the heat of the day, my
body would stick to the hard leather seats of the third-class
compartment, and there would be a layer of dust and soot
over everything. I would be tired and thirsty by the time
we reached Dijon. I must remember to take a bottle of
water with me, with, perhaps, a little wine in it. I would be
glad to get to Paris. But not for long. There would be the
walk from the platforms of the Gare de Lyon to the plat¬
forms of the Metro. My suitcase would be heavy by then.
Direction Neuilly to Concorde. Change. Direction Mairie
d’Issy to Gare Montparnasse. Change. Direction Porte
d’Orleans to Alesia. Exit. Montrouge. Avenue de Chatillnn
Hotel de Bordeaux. And on Monday morning there would
be breakfast standing at the counter of the Cafe de
l’Orient and another Metro journey, Denfert-Rochereau to
fitoile, and a walk down the Avenue Marceau. Monsieur
Mathis would be already there. ‘Good mor nin g., Monsieur
Vadassy! You are looking very well. This term you will
take elementary English, advanced German, and element¬
ary Italian. I myself will take the advanced English We
have twelve new students. There are three businessmen
and nine waiters. All are for English. There is none who
wishes Hungarian.’ Another year.

But meanwhile there were the pines and the sea, the red
rocks and the sand. I stretched luxuriously and a lizard
darted across the tiled floor of the terrace. It stopped sud¬
denly to bask in the sun beyond the shadow of my chair.
I could see the pulse beating in its throat. Its Jailjay curved

X'ctHWs.

/-<*• -r-\



in a neat semicircle, making a tangent of the diagonal
division between the tiles. Lizards have an uncanny sense
of design.

It was this lizard which reminded me of my photo¬
graphs.

I possess only two objects of value in this world. One of
them is a camera, the other a letter dated February io,
1867, from Deak to von Beust. If someone were to offer
me money for the letter I would accept it thankfully; but
I am very fond of the camera, and no thing but starvation
would induce me to part with it. I am not a particularly
good photographer; but I get a lot of pleasure pretending
that I am.

I had been taking photographs at the Reserve and had,
the previous day, taken an exposed spool into the village
chemist’s shop to be developed. Now, in the ordinary way,
I would not dream of letting anyone else develop my films.
Half the pleasure of amateur photography lies in doing
your own darkroom work. But I had been experimenting,
and if I did not see the results of the experiments before
I left St Gatien, I would have no opportunity of making
use of them. So I had left the film with the chemist. The
negative was to be developed and dry by eleven o’clock.

The time was eleven thirty. If I went to the chemist’s
now, I would have time to get back, bathe, and have an
aperitif before lunch.

I walked along the terrace, round through the gardens,
and up the steps to the road. By now the sun was hearin g
down so fiercely that the air above the asphalt was quiver¬
ing. I had no hat and when I touched my hair it was burn¬
ing hot. I draped a handkerchief over my head and walked
up the hill, and then down the main street leading to the
harbour.


The chemist’s shop was cool and smelt of perfumes and
disinfectant. The sound of the doorbell had barely died
away before the chemist was facing me over the counter.
His eyes met mine, but he seemed not to recognise me.

‘Monsieur?’

‘I left a spool of film yesterday to be developed.’

‘It is not ready yet.’

‘It was promised for eleven o’clock.’

‘It is not ready yet,’ he repeated steadily.

I was silent for a moment. There was something curious
about the chemist’s manner. His eyes, magnified by the
thick pebble-glasses he wore, remained fixed on mine.
There was an odd look in them. Then I realised what the
look was. The man was frightened.

I remember that the realisation gave me a shock. He
was afraid of me—I who had spent my life being afraid of
others had at last inspired fear! I wanted to laugh. I was
also annoyed, for I thought I knew what had happened. He
had spoiled the film.

‘Is the negative all right?’

He nodded vehemently.

‘Perfectly, Monsieur. It is a question only of the drying.
If you will be good enough to give me your name and
address, I will send my son with the negative as soon as
it is ready.’

‘That’s all right. I’ll call again.’

‘It will be no trouble. Monsieur.’

There was a strange note of urgency in his voice now.
Mentally I shrugged. If the man had spoiled the film and
was so childishly anxious not to be the bearer of the bad
news it was no affair of mine. I had already resigned myself
to the loss of my experiments.

‘Very well.’ I gave him my name and address.


13





He repeated them very loudly as he wrote them down. 1

‘Monsieur Vadassy, Hotel de la Reserve.’ His voicej
dropped a little, and he ran his tongue round his lips before
going on. ‘It shall be sent round to you as soon as it is
ready.’

I thanked him and went to the door of the shop. A man
in a p anama hat and an ill-fitting suit of Sunday blacks was
standing facing me. The pavement was narrow, and as
he did not move to make way for me, I murmured an
apology and made to squeeze past him. As I did so he laid
a hand on my arm.

‘Monsieur Vadassy?’

‘Yes?’

‘I must ask you to accompany me to the Commissariat.’

‘What on earth for?’

‘A passport formality only, Monsieur.’ He was stolidly
polite.

‘Then hadn’t I better get my passport from the hotel?’

He did not answer but looked past me and nodded almost
imperceptibly. A hand gripped my other arm tightly. I
looked over my shoulder and saw that there was a uni¬
formed agent standing in the shop door behind me. The
chemist had disappeared.

The hands propelled me forward, not too gently.

‘I don’t understand,’ I said.

‘You will,’ said the plain-clothes man briefly. ‘AUez,
file!’

He was no longer polite.


2


The journey to the police station was accomplished in
silence. After the initial demonstration of authority the
agent dropped a few paces to the rear and allowed me to
walk on ahead with the plain-clothes man. I was glad of
this, for I had no wish to be marched through the village
as though I were a pickpocket. As it was, we drew some
curious glances, and I heard a jocular reference by two
passers-by to the violon.

French slang is very obscure. Anything less like a
violin than the Commissariat de Police would be difficult
to imagine. The only really ugly building in St Gatien, it
is a forbidding cube of dirty concrete with small windows
like eyes. It lies some hundreds of metres away from the
village round the bay, and its size is accounted for by die
fact that it houses the police administration of an area of
which St Gatien happens to be the centre. The facts that
St Gatien is also one of the smaller, more law-abiding, and
least accessible villages in the area had been ignored by
the responsible authorities.

The room into which I was taken was bare except for a
table and some wooden benches. The plain-clothes man
retired importantly, leaving me with the agent , who sat
down on the bench beside me.

‘Will this business take long?’

‘It is not permitted to speak.’

I looked out of the window. Across the bay I could see


15





the coloured sunshades on the Reserve beach. There would
not, I reflected, be time for a swim. I could, perhaps, have
an aperitif at one of the cafes on my way back. It was all
very annoying.

‘Levez-vousP said my escort suddenly.

The door opened and an elderly man with a pen behind
his ear, no cap, and an unbuttoned tunic beckoned us out.
The agent with me did up his collar, smoothed out his
tunic, straightened his cap and, gripping my arm with
unnecessary force, marched me down the passage to a
room at the end of it. He rapped smartly on the door and
opened it. Then he pushed me inside.

I felt a threadbare carpet beneath my feet. Sitting facing
me behind a table littered with papers was a spectacled,
businesslike litde man. This was the Commissaire. Beside
the table, wedged in a small chair with curved arms, was
a very fat man in a tussore suit. Except for a clipped
mouse-coloured bristle on the rolls of fat round his neck,
he was bald. The skin of his face was loose and hung
down in thick folds that drew the comers of his mouth
with them. They gave the face a faintly judicial air. The
eyes were extraordinarily small and heavily lidded. Sweat
poured off his face and he kept passing a screwed-up
handkerchief round the inside of his collar. He did not
look at me.

‘Josef Vadassy?’

It was the Commissaire who spoke.

‘Yes.’

The Commissaire nodded to the agent behind me, and
the man went out, closing the door softly behind him.

‘Your identity card?’

I produced the card from my wallet and handed it over. He
drew a sheet of paper towards him and began making notes.

16


‘Age?’

‘Thirty-two.’ It was on the identity card; he was being
officious.

‘You are, I see, a teacher of languages.’

‘Yes.’

‘Who employs you?’

‘The Bertrand Mathis School of Languages, one hundred
and fourteen bis , Avenue Marceau, Paris, six.’

While he was writing this down I glanced at the fat ma n
His eyes were closed and he was f anning his face gently
with the handkerchief.

‘Jicoutez!’ said the Commissaire sharply. ‘What is your
business here?’

‘I am on holiday.’

‘You are a Yugoslav subject?’

‘No; Hungarian.’

The Commissaire looked starded. My heart sank. The
long and involved explanation of my national status, or
rather, lack of it, would have to be given yet again. It never
failed to arouse officialdom’s worst instincts. The Com¬
missaire rummaged among the papers on his table. Sud¬
denly he gave an exclamation of satisfaction and flourished
something in front of my face.

‘Then how. Monsieur, do you explain this?’

With a start I realised that ‘this’ was my own passport—
the passport that I had believed to be in my suitcase at the
Reserve. That meant that the police had been to my room.

I began to feel uneasy.

‘I am waiting. Monsieur, for your explanation. How is
it that you, a Hungarian, are using a Yugoslav passport?
A passport, moreover, that has not been valid for ten
years?’

Out of the comer of my eye I saw that the fat man had










stopped f anning his face. I began to give the explanation
I knew by heart.

‘I was bom in Szabadka in Hungary. By the treaty of
Trianon in 1919 Szabadka was incorporated in Yugoslav
territory. In 1921 I went as a student to the University of
Buda-Pesth. I obtained a Yugoslav passport for the pur¬
pose. While I was still at the University my father and
elder brother were shot by the Yugoslav police for a poli¬
tical offence. My mother had died during the war and I
had no other relations or friends. I was advised not to
attempt to return to Yugoslavia. Conditions in Hungary
were terrible. In 1922 I went to England, and remained
there, teaching German in a school near London until
1931, when my labour permit was withdrawn. I was one
of many other foreigners who had their labour permits
withdrawn at that time. When my passport had expired
I had applied for its renewal to the Yugoslav legation in
London, but had been refused on the grounds that I was
no longer a Yugoslav citizen. I had afterwards applied for
British naturalisation, but when I was deprived of my
labour permit I was forced to find work elsewhere. I
went to Paris. I was allowed by the police to remain and
given papers with the proviso that if I left France I
should not be permitted to return. I have since applied*
for French citizenship.’

I looked from one to the other of them. The fat man was
lighting a cigarette. The Commissaire flicked my useless
passport contemptuously and looked at his colleague. I was
looking at the Commissaire when the fat man spoke. His
voice made me jump, for from those thick lips, that massive
jowl, that enormous body, came a very light, husky tenor.

‘What,’ he said, ‘was the political offence for which your
father and brother were shot?’

18






th 5u SP ° ke dowly and carefuU -'’> as though he were afraid
S“ hts race was gorng to crack. When I turned to answer
turn he was kghnng the cigarette like a cigar and blowing
a jet of smoke at the burning end of it. 8

‘They were social-democrats,’ I said

,Ahl ' as *"* k311 - ~

‘Then that perhaps explains ..he began unpleasandy.

an 7 • * e fat f an h f} d U P a repressive hand. It was small
and puffy with a roll of fat at the wrist like a baby’s.

What languages do you teach, Monsieur Vadassy’’ he
said gendy. J *

‘German, English, and Italian, occasionally Hungarian
also. But I am afraid that I cannot see what these questions
have to do with my passport.’

He ignored the last remark.

‘You have been to Italy’’

‘Yes.’

‘When?’

‘As a child. We used to spend our holidays there.’

You have not been there during the present regime?’

For obvious reasons, no.’ s

‘Do you know any Italians in France’’

‘There is one where I work. He is a teacher like myself ’
His name? J

‘Phillipino Rossi.’

I saw the Commissaire write this down.

‘No others?’

‘No.’

You are a photographer, Monsieur Vadassy?’

It was the Commissaire again.

‘An amateur—yes.’

‘How many cameras do you possess? ’


19



‘One.’ This was fantastic.

‘What make is it?’

‘A Zeiss Contax.’

He opened a drawer in his desk.

‘Is this it?’

I recognised my camera.

‘It is,’ I said angrily, ‘and I should like to know what
right you have to remove my belongings from my room.
You will please give it back to me.’ I stretched out my
hand for it.

The Commissaire put the camera back in the drawer.

‘You have no other camera but this?’

‘I have already told you. No!’

A grin of triumph spread over the Commissaire’s face.
He opened the drawer again.

‘Then how, my dear Monsieur Vadassy, do you explain
the fact that the chemist in the village received from you
this length of cinematograph film for development?’

I stared at him. Between his outstretched hands was the
developed negative of the film I had left with the chemist.
From where I sat I could see against the light of the
window my experimental shots; two dozen of them with
but one single subject—lizards. Then I saw the Com¬
missaire grin again. I laughed as irritatingly as I could.

‘I can see,’ I said patronisingly, ‘that you are no photo¬
grapher, Monsieur. That is not cinematograph film.’

‘No?’

‘No. I admit that it looks a little like it. But you will find
that cinematograph film is a millimetre narrower. That is
a standard spool of thirty-six twenty-four by thirty-six
mil l im etre exposures for the Contax camera.’

‘Then those photographs were taken by this camera
here, the camera that was in your room?’


20


‘Certainly.’

There was a pregnant pause. I saw the two exchange
looks. Then:

‘When did you arrive in St Gatien?’

It was the fat man once more.

‘On Tuesday.’

‘From?’

‘Nice.’

‘At what time did you leave Nice?’

‘I left by the nine twenty-nine train.’

‘At what time did you get to the Reserve?’

‘Just before dinner, at about seven o’clock.’

‘But the Nice train arrives at Toulon at three thirty.
There is a bus for St Gatien at four. You should have
arrived at five. Why were you late?’

‘This is ridiculous.’

He looked up quickly. The small eyes were coldly
menacing.

‘Answer my question. Why were you late?’

‘Very well. I left my suitcase in Toulon station and went
for a walk down to the waterfront. I had not seen Toulon
before and there was another bus at six.’

He wiped the inside of his collar thoughtfully.

‘What is your salary, Monsieur Vadassy?’

‘Sixteen hundred francs a month.’

‘That is not very much, is it?’

‘Unfortunately, no.’

‘The Contax is an expensive camera?’

‘It is a good one.’

‘No doubt; but I am asking you how much you paid for
it.’

‘Four thousand, five hundred francs.’

He whistled softly. ‘Nearly three months’ pay, eh?’


21



‘Photography is my hobby.’

‘A very expensive one! You seem to be very clever with
your sixteen hundred francs. Holidays in Nice and at the
Hotel de la Reserve, too! More than we poor policemen
can afford, eh, Commissaire?’

The Commissaire laughed sardonically. I could feel
myself getting very red in the face.

‘I saved my money to buy the camera,’ I said. ‘As for this
holiday, it is the first I have had for five years. I saved my
money for that also.’

‘But naturally!’ The Commissaire sneered as he said it.

The sneer aroused me.

‘Now, Monsieur,’ I protested angrily. ‘I have had enough
of this. It is my turn to demand explanations. What exactly
do you want? I am prepared to answer questions about my
passport. You are within your rights in asking them. But
you have no right to steal my private property. Neither
have you any right to question me in this way about my
private affairs. As for those negatives to which you seem
to attach some mysterious importance, I have yet to learn
that it is forbidden to photograph lizards. Now, Messieurs,
I have committed no crime, but I am hungry, and it is time
for lunch at the hotel. You will please return to me my
camera, my photographs, and my passport immediately.’

For a moment there was dead silence. I glared from one
to the other. Neither moved.

‘Very well,’I said at last, and turned to the door.

‘One moment,’ said the fat man.

I stopped.

‘Well?’

Please don’t waste your time and ours. The mgr) out¬
side the door will not allow you to leave. There are a few
more questions we have to ask you.’


22


‘You may keep me here by force,’ I said grimly, ‘but
you cannot force me to answer your questions.’

‘Naturally,’ said the fat man slowly; ‘that is the law.
But we can recommend you to do so—in your own
interests.’

I said nothing.

The fat man picked up the negative from the Com-
missaire’s desk and, holding it up to the light, ran it
through his fingers.

‘Over two dozen photographs,’ he commented, ‘and all
practically the same. Now that, I think, is curious. Don’t
you think so, Vadassy?’

‘Not in the least,’ I replied curdy. ‘If you knew any¬
thing at all about photography, or if you were just
ordinarily observant, you would notice that each one is
lighted differently, that in each one the shadows are
massed in different ways. The fact that the object photo¬
graphed in every case is a lizard is unim portant. The
differences lie in the way each is lighted and composed.
Anyway, if I like to take a hundred shots of lizards in the
sun I don’t see that it is any business of yours.’

‘This is a very ingenious explanation, Vadassy. Very
ingenious. Now I will tell you what I think. My idea is
that you were not in the least interested in what you
photographed with those twenty-six exposures and that
you were merely exposing the film as quickly as you could
to complete the spool and get the other ten exposures
developed.’

‘The other ten? What are you talking about?’

‘Isn’t it a waste of time to pretend any longer, Vadassy?’

‘I really don’t know what you mean.’

He heaved himself out of the chair and stood dose to
me.


23





‘Don’t you? What about the first ten exposures, -
Vadassy? Would you like to explain to the Commissaire
and myself why you took those photographs? I feel sure
we should be interested!’ He tapped me on the chest
with his finger. ‘Was it the lighting, Vadassy, or was it
the massing of the shadows that so interested you in the
new fortifications outside the naval base of Toulon?’

I gaped at him.

‘Is this a joke? The only other photographs on that
spool are some I took in Nice of a carnival that was held
the day before I left.’

‘You admit taking the photographs on this film?’ he
said deliberately.

‘I have already said so.’

‘Good. Please look at them.’

I took the negative, held it up to the light and ran it
slowly through my fingers. Lizards, lizards, lizards. Some
of the shots looked promising. Lizards. More lizards.
Suddenly I stopped. I looked up quickly. Both of them
were watching me.

‘Go on, Vadassy,’ said the Commissaire ironically;
‘don’t trouble to look surprised.’

Unable to believe my eyes, I looked at the negative
a gain There was a long shot of a section of coastline partly
obscured by what looked like a twig close to the lens of
the camera. There was something on the coastline—a
short grey strip. Another shot, closer this time and from
a different angle, of that same grey strip. There were
thin g s that looked like trap-doors along one side of it.
More shots. Two of them were from the same angle;
another had been taken looking down and nearer still.
Then came three almost wholly obscured by a dark mass
in front of the camera. The edge of the mass was blurred


and very faintly patterned like a piece of cloth. Then
there was one of what looked like a concrete surface out
of focus and very near to the camera. The last of them
was overexposed, but only one corner of it was ob¬
scured. It was taken from one end of what looked like
a wide concrete gallery. There were some curious arrange¬
ments of highlights. They puzzled me for a moment.
Then at last I understood. I was looking at the long, sleek
barrels of siege guns.


25



The formalities of my arrest were attended by the exam¬
ining magistrate, a harassed little man who, prompted by
the fat detective, subjected me to a perfunctory interroga¬
tion before instructing the Commissaire to charge me. I
was, I learned, charged with espionage, trespassing in a
military zone, taking photographs calculated to endanger
the safety of the French Republic, and of being in pos¬
session of such photographs. After the charges had been
read out to me and I had signified that I had understood
them, I was deprived of my belt (lest, presumably, I
should hang myself) and the contents of my pockets, and
taken, clutching my trousers, to a cell at the rear of the
building. There I was left alone.

After a bit, I began to think more calmly. It was ridi¬
culous. It was outrageous. It was impossible. Yet it had
happened. I was in a police cell under arrest on a charge
of espionage. The penalty, should I be convicted, would
be perhaps four years’ imprisonment—four years in a
French prison and then deportation. I could put up with
prison—even a French one—but deportation! I began
to feel sick and desperately frightened. If France expelled
me there was nowhere left for me to go. Yugoslavia would
arrest me. Hungary would not admit me. Neither would
Germany or Italy. Even if a convicted spy could get into
England without a passport he would not be permitted
to work. To America I would be merely another undesir-

26



able alien. The South American republics would Hpmgrid
sums of money that I would not possess as surety for
my good behaviour. Soviet Russia would have no more
use for a convicted spy than would England. Even the
Chinese wanted your passport. There would be nowhere
I could go, nowhere. And after all, what did it matter?
What happened to an insignificant teacher of languages
without national status was of no interest to anyone. No
consul would intervene on his behalf; no Parliament, no
Congress, no Chamber of Deputies would inquire into
his fate. Officially he did not exist; he was an abstrac¬
tion, a ghost. All he could decently and logically do was
destroy himself.

I pulled myself together sharply. I was being hysterical.
I was not yet a convicted spy. I was still in France. I
must use my brains, think, find the very simple explana¬
tion that must exist for the presence of those photographs
in my camera. I must go very carefully over the ground.
I must cast my thoughts back to Nice.

I had, I remembered, put the new spool in the camera
and taken the photographs of the carnival on Monday.
Then I had gone back to my hotel and put the camera
in my suitcase. It had still been there when I packed later
that night. It had remained in my suitcase until I had
unpacked at the Reserve on Tuesday ev ening While I
had been in Toulon the suitcase had been in the con¬
signs at the station. Could anyone have used it during
the two hours I was walking about Toulon? Impossible.
The suitcase was locked and no one could break it open
in the consigne, steal the camera, take those dangerous-
looking photographs, and restore the camera to the suit¬
case in two hours. Besides, why put the camera back
again? No, that would not do.


27





Then another thought struck me. The photographs I-
was supposed to have taken were the first ten on the
spool. They must have been, for my last lizard shot had
been number thirty-six. There were no double exposures
on the film. Therefore, as I had started a spool at the
carnival in Nice, a new spool must have been put in
before the Toulon photographs were taken.

I jumped up in my excitement from the bed on which
I had been sitting, and my trousers sagged down. I
rescued them and, with my hands in my pockets, marched
up and down the cell. Of course! I remembered now.

I had been slightly surprised to notice when I had started
on the lizard experiments that the exposure counter on
the camera had registered number eleven. I had thought
that I had made only eight exposures at Nice. But it is
very easy to forget odd shots, especially when there are
thirty-six exposures on the spool. Yes, the spool had
certainly been changed. But when? It couldn’t have been
done before I arrived at the Reserve, and I had started
on the lizards the following morning after breakfast. It
came to this, then: that between 7 p.m. Tuesday and
8.30 a.m. (breakfast-time) Wednesday, somebody had
taken my camera from my room, put a new spool of film
in it, gone to Toulon, penetrated a carefully guarded mili¬
tary zone, taken the photographs, returned to the Reserve
and restored my camera to my room.

It didn’t sound possible or probable. Quite apart fr o m
any other objections, there was the simple question of
the light. It was practically dark by eight o’clock, and as
I had not arrived until seven, that disposed of Tuesday
Even supposing that the photographer had gone by night
and started work at sunrise, he would have had to be
very quick and clever to get my camera back into my

28


room while I was lying in bed looking out of the window.
And, anyway, why return it to me with the spool still
inside it? 'How had the police got into the business? Had
the taker of the photographs told them anonymously?
There was, of course, the chemist. The police had obvi¬
ously been in ambush for the owner of the negative.
Perhaps the chemist had been caught with the photo¬
graphs and sworn that they had belonged to me. But th^n,
that didn’t account for their being with my experimental
shots. There had been no sign of a join in the negative.
It was hideously puzzling.

I was feverishly going over the ground for the third
time when there was the sound of footsteps in the cor¬
ridor outside and the door of my cell opened. The fat man
in the tussore suit came in. The door closed behind him

For a moment he stood wiping the inside of his collar
with his handkerchief, then he nodded to me and sat
down on the bed.

‘Sit down, Vadassy.’

I sat down on the only other piece of furniture in the
room, an enamelled iron bidet with a wooden lid on it.
The small, dangerous eyes surveyed me thoughtfully.

‘Would you like a bowl of soup and some bread?’

This I had not expected.

‘No, thank you. I am not hungry.’

‘A cigarette, then?’

He proffered a crumpled packet of Gauloises. This soli¬
citude was, I felt, highly suspicious; but I took one.

He gave me a light from the end of his own cigarette.
Then he carefully wiped the sweat from his upper lip and
from behind his ears.

‘Why,’ he said at last, ‘did you admit that you took
those photographs?’


29




‘Is this another official interrogation?’

He brushed cigarette ash off his stomach with the now
sodden handkerchief.

‘No. You will be interrogated officially by the juge
d’instruction of the district. That is no business of mine.
I am of the Surete G6nerale and attached to the Depart¬
ment of Naval Intelligence. You may speak quite freely
to me.’

I did not see why he should expect a spy to speak
quite freely to a member of the Department of Naval
Intelligence, but I did not raise the point. I had, indeed,
every intention of speaking as freely as I was allowed to.

‘Very well. I admitted taking the photographs because
I did take them. That is, all those on the spool with the
exception of the first ten.’

“Quite so. Then how do you account for those first
ten photographs?’

‘I think the spool in my camera was changed.’

He raised his eyebrows. I plunged into a long account
of my movements since leaving Nice and the deductions
I had made concerning the origin of the incr imina ting
photographs. He heard me out, but was obviously not
impressed.

‘This, of course, is not evidence,’ he said when I had
finished.

‘I don’t offer it as evidence. I am just trying to find a
rational explanation of this fantastic affair.’

‘The Commissaire thinks that he has found the ex¬
planation. I do not blame him. On the face of things the
case against you is perfectly good. The photographs are
on a negative which you have admitted to be yours. You
are also a suspicious person. Simple!’

I looked him in the eye.


30



But I take it that you are not satisfied, Monsieur?’

‘I didn’t say that.’

‘No, but you would scarcely be here talking to me in
this way if you were satisfied.’

His jowl distorted into the beginnings of a grin.

‘You overrate your importance. I am not interested in
spies, but in who employs them.’

‘Then,’ I said angrily, ‘you are wasting your time. I am
not the person who took the photographs, and my only
employer is Monsieur Mathis, who pays me to teach
languages.’

But he did not appear to be listening. There was a
pause.

‘The Commissaire and I agreed,’ he said at last, ‘that
you were one of three things—a clever spy, a very stupid
one, or an innocent man. I may say that the Commissaire
thought that you must be the second. I was inclined from
the first to think you innocent. You behaved far too
stupidly. No guilty man would be such an imbecile.’

‘Thank you.’

‘I am not in the least desirous of your thanks, Vadassy.
It was a conclusion that I disliked exceedingly. In any
case, I can do nothing for you now. Understand that,
please. You have been arrested by the Commissaire. You
may be innocent, but it will not disturb my rest in the
slightest if you are sent to prison.’

‘I feel sure of that.’

‘On the other hand,’ he continued thoughtfully, ‘it is
essential that I should know who did take the photo¬
graphs.’

There was another silence. I felt that I was expected
to make some comment. But I waited for him to go on.
After a few moments he did so.


3i


‘If the real criminal is discovered, we may, Vadassy r ~*~
be able to do something for you.’

‘Do something for me?’

He cleared his throat noisily.

‘WeE, of course, you have no consul to intervene on *
your behalf. It is our responsibility to see that you are
treated properly. Providing, naturaUy, that you co-operate
with us in a satisfactory manner, you need have no
fears.’

‘I have already told you aU I know. Monsieur ...’ I
stopped. There was a lump in my throat and the words
would not come. But the fat man evidently thought that
I was waiting to be supplied with his name.

‘Beghin,’ he said, ‘Michel Beghin.’

He paused and looked at his stomach once more. The
ceU was insufferably hot and I could see the sweat from
his chest sta in i n g through his striped shirt. ‘AU the same,’
he added, ‘I think you may be able to help us.’

He got up from the bed, went to the ceH door and
banged on it once with his fist. The key chcked in the
lock and I saw the uniform of an agent outside. The fat
man muttered something I did not hear and the door
closed again. He remained standing there and lit ano t h e r
cigarette. A minute later the door opened again and he
took something from the agent. As the door closed v

once more he turned round. In his hanrl was the /

camera.

‘You recognise this ?’

‘Of course.’

‘Take it and examine it very closely. I want to know if
you find anything curious about it.’

I took it and did as I was told. I tried the shutter, the
viewfinder, and the focusing; I took out the lens and


32



undid the back; I peered in every nook and cranny of
the instrument. Finally I put it back in the case.

‘I don’t see anything curious about it. It is just as I left it.’

He put his hand in his pocket and drew out a piece of
folded paper. He held it up.

‘This, Vadassy, we found in your pocketbook. Have a

look.’

I took the paper and opened it. Then I looked at him.

‘Well, what about it?’ I said defensively. ‘This is merely
the insurance policy on the camera. As you reminded
me, it is an expensive instrument. I paid a few francs to
insure myself against its loss or,’ I added pointedly,
‘theft.’

He took the paper from me with a patient sigh.

‘It is lucky for you,’ he said, ‘that French justice takes
care of imbeciles as well as criminals. This insurance policy
indemnifies Josef Vadassy against the loss of the Zeiss
Ikon Contax camera, serial number F/64523/2. Please
look at the serial number on the camera you have there.’

I looked. The serial number was different.

‘Then,’ I exclaimed excitedly, ‘this isn’t my camera.
Why were my photographs on that negative?’

‘Because, my dear imbecile, it was not the films that
were changed, but the cameras. This camera is a stan¬
dard production and widely used. You used this camera
with the Toulon exposures already made to photograph
your stupid lizards. You even noticed that the number of
the exposure was different from that in your own camera.
Then you removed the film and took it to the chemist.
He saw these ten photographs, saw, as any fool would
see, what they were, and brought them to the police.
Now, imbecile, do you see?’

I did.


c


33




‘So,’ I said, ‘when you so generously proclaimed your
faith in my innocence you were perfectly well aware of
it. In view of that I should like to know what right you
have to keep me under arrest like this.’

He wiped the top of his head with his handkerchief
and surveyed me from beneath lowered lids.

‘Your arrest is no affair of mine. I can do nothing.
The Commissaire is annoyed with you, as this evidence
has spoiled his charge sheet; but he has agreed, in the
interests of justice, to strike out three of the charges. Only
one remains.’

‘What is that?’

‘You were in possession of photographs calculated to
endanger the safety of the Republic. That is a serious
offence. It remains, unless,’ he added significantly, ‘un¬
less means can be found to strike it out also. I shall
naturally intercede with the Commissaire on your behalf,
but I am afraid that unless I can offer some good reason
for this irregular step the charge will go forward. It
would mean deportation at the very least.’

My brain went as cold as ice.

‘You mean,’ I said steadily, ‘that if I do not agree to
co-operate, as you call it, this ridiculous charge will be
pressed?’

He did not answer. He was fighting his fourth cigarette.
When he had finished he let it hang lightly between his
loose lips. He blew smoke past it and gazed contempla¬
tively at the blank wall as though it were a painting and
he were a collector wondering whether to bid.

‘The cameras,’ he said thoughtfully, ‘could have been
changed for one of three reasons. Someone might have
wished to do you an injury. Someone might have wished
to get rid of the photographs in a hurry. Or it could


have been done accidentally. The first hypothesis, I think,
we can dismiss. It is too elaborate. There was no guaran¬
tee that (a) you would take the film to be developed and
that (b) the chemist would go to the police. The second
hypothesis is unreal. The photographs were valuable and
the possibility of retrieving them remote. Besides, they
were safe enough inside the camera. No, I think it was
accidental. The cameras are of an identical pattern and
in standard cases. But where and when were they
changed? Not at Nice, for you told me that you took
your camera back to the hotel and packed it. Not on your
journey, because it was under lock and key in your
suitcase during the entire time. It was at the Reserve that
the change was made. If the change was accidental, then
it could only have been made in one of the public rooms.
At what time? You brought your camera down at break¬
fast-time yesterday, you tell me. Where did you have
breakfast?’

‘On the terrace.’

‘Did you take the camera with you?’

‘No. I left it in its case on one of the chairs in the hall to
pick up as I went through into the garden afterwards.’

‘At what time did you go to breakfast?’

‘At about half past eight.’

‘And to the gardens?’

‘About an hour later.’

‘And then you took photographs?’

‘Yes.’

‘At what time did you return?’

‘It was nearly twelve.’

‘What did you do?’

‘I went straight to my room and removed the exposed
spool.’


35



‘Then you did not leave your camera before you started-
photographing your lizards except for an hour between
eight thirty and nine thirty?’

‘No.’

‘And during that time it was on a chair by the door
leading to the garden.’

‘Yes.’

‘Now think carefully. Was the camera in the same
position when you picked it up as it was when you put
it down?’

I thought carefully.

‘No, it was not,’ I said at last. ‘I left it hanging by the
strap of the case on the back of one of the chairs. When
I picked it up it was lying on the seat of another chair.’

‘You did not look to see if it was still hanging where
you had left it?’

‘Why, no. I saw it on the seat of the chair and took
it. Why should I look?’

‘You might have noticed if there was still a camera
hanging on the back of the chair.’

‘It would be easy not to. The strap is long so that the
actual camera case would hang below the seat level of
the chair.’

‘Good. So it amounts to this: you hang a camera on
the back of a chair. When you return you see an identical
camera on the seat of another chair. T hink ing that this
is your property, you take it, leaving your camera where
you put it on die back of the original chair. Presumably,
then, the owner of the second camera later arrives, finds
his camera missing from the seat of the chair, looks
round and discovers yours.’

‘It seems likely.’

‘Were all the guests down to breakfast?’

36



‘I don’t know. There are only eighteen rooms at the
Reserve and they are not all occupied, but I had only
arrived the previous night. I would not know. But every¬
one going downstairs and through the hall would pass
the chairs.’

‘Then, my dear Vadassy, we can say with reasonable
confidence that one of those now staying at the Reserve
is the person who owns th i s camera and who took those
photographs. But which? I think we may leave out the
waiters and servants, for they are all from this village or
near-by villages. We shall, of course, make inquiries, but
they will, I think, give us nothing. There are, besides,
ten guests, the manager Koche and his wife. Now,
Vadassy, the guilty one had your camera, a Zeiss Ikon
Contax identical to this one here. It is, you will realise,
obviously quite impossible for us to arrest the entire pen¬
sion and search everyone’s luggage. Apart from the fact
that several are foreigners whose consuls would be
troublesome, we might fail to find the camera. In that
case the guilty one would be on his guard and we should
be helpless. Inquiries,’ he went on pointedly, ‘must be
made by someone whose presence would arouse no sus¬
picion, who could find out discreetly who has been seen
with a Contax camera.’

‘You mean me?’

‘You might proceed very simply by finding out which
of them have cameras. Those that have cameras but not
Contax cameras may be less under suspicion than those
who have no cameras. You see, Vadassy, the person who
has your camera may know by now that the change has
been made. In that case he would hide your camera lest
he should be identified as the owner of the camera with
the Toulon photographs in it. There is also the possi-


37


bility,’ he added dreamily, ‘that he might try to get his
own camera back again. You must be on the watch for
that.’

‘You don’t put this suggestion forward seriously?’

He glanced at me coldly.

‘Believe me, my friend, if I had any alternative I should
be glad. You do not seem to me very intelligent.’

‘But I am under arrest. Surely,’ I said acidly, ‘you will
not be able to persuade the Commissaire to release me?’

‘You will remain under arrest, but you will be released
on parole. Only Koche knows of your arrest. We visited
your room. He did not like it, but it was explained that
it was an affair of passports and that you had given per¬
mission. You will state that there was a misunderstanding
and that you were detained by mistake. You will report
to me by telephone here every mornin g . Telephone from
the post office in the village. If you wish to find me at
any other time you will telephone to the Commissaire.’

‘But I have to leave on Saturday morning for Paris. I
am expected to start the new term on Monday.’

‘You will stay until you have permission to go. Also
you will make no attempt to get into touch with anyone
outside the Reserve except the police.’

A sickening sense of helplessness crept over me.

‘I shall lose my job.’

Beghin got up and stood over me.

‘Listen, Vadassy,’ he said; and in his absurd voice there
was an ugly note far more menacing than the Commis-
saire’s bluster. ‘You will stay at the R6serve until you are
told to go. If you try to leave before then, you will be
re-arrested and I shall make it my personal business to
see that you are deported by steamer to Dubrovnik and
that your dossier is handed to the Yugoslav police. And

38


get this into your head. The quicker we find out who took
those photographs the sooner you can go. But don’t try
any tricks and don’t write any letters. Either you do
what you are told or you will be deported. You will be
very lucky if you avoid deportation, anyway. So be care¬
ful. You understand, eh?’

I did—clearly.

An hour later I walked back along the road from the
Commissariat to the village. The Contax was slung over
my shoulder. When I put my hand in my pocket I could
feel a small piece of paper with a list of the guests at the
Reserve typed on it.

Koche was in his office when I got there. As I passed
by to go to my room he came out. He was in blue jeans,
sandals, and a maillot, and, to judge from his wet hair,
had just been swimming. With his tall, thin, stooping
figure and his sleepy manner he looked very unmanagerial.

‘Ah, Monsieur,’ he said with a faint smile. ‘You are
back. Nothing serious, I hope. The police came here this
morning. They said they had your permission to take
your passport.’

I looked as disgruntled as I could.

‘No, nothing serious. A question of identity and a mis¬
take which they took a fantastic time to discover. They
were apologetic, but what can one do? The French police
are wholly ridiculous.’

He looked serious, professed amazement and indigna¬
tion, complimented me on my forbearance. He was clearly
unconvinced. I could scarcely blame him. I was feeling too
weak to play the outraged citizen with any hope of success.

‘By the way, Monsieur,’ he said casually, as I made for
the stairs, ‘it is Saturday morning that you are leaving,
I believe?’


39


So he wanted to get rid of me. I affected to consider-
the question.

‘I had thought of doing so,’ I said; ‘but I may decide
to stay a day or two longer. That is,’ I added, with a
wintry smile, ‘if the police have no objection.’

He hesitated barely a second.

‘A pleasure,’ he said, but without enthusiasm.

As I turned again to go, it may have been my fancy,
but I thought that his eyes were on the camera.





4

I find it difficult now to remember much of the next
two hours. But I do know that when I reached my room
there was for me only one question in the world—was
there a train from Toulon to Paris on Sunday afternoon?

I remember that I rushed to my suitcase and searched
fever ishl y for the timetable.

You may find it odd that, faced with utter and complete
disaster, I should be concerned about so trivial a matter
as the train services to Paris. But human beings do be¬
have oddly in times of great stress. Passengers in a
sinking s h i p will go back to their cabins as the last boat
is casting off from the side, to save trifling personal pos¬
sessions. Men on the point of death worry about small
unpaid bills as they go forward to eternity.

What worried me was the prospect of being late on the
Monday morning. Moqsieur Mathis was very strict on the
score of punctuality. Latecomers, whether pupils or
teachers, incurred his grave displeasure. This was ex¬
pressed in biting terms and a very loud voice at a moment
when the additional embarrassment of an audience had
to be suffered. The denunciation, moreover, usually fol¬
lowed some hours after the commission of the crime. The
suspense could be very wearing.

If, I reasoned, I could catch a train from Toulon on
Sunday afternoon and travel overnight to Paris, I might
be at the school on time. I remember the feeling of


4i





relief I experienced on finding that there was a train which-
reached Paris at six o’clock on the Monday morning. My
mind, was working in a fog. Beghin had said that I should
not be able to leave on Saturday. Terrible! Monsieur
Mathis would be angry. Could I get to Paris in time if
I left on Sunday? Yes, thank God, I could! All was well.

I think that if anyone had suggested to me at that
moment that I should not be able to leave on the Sunday,

I should have laughed disbelievingly. But there would
have been hysteria in that laugh for, as I sat on the floor
beside my open suitcase, fear was clutching at the mech¬
anism inside my chest, making my heart thud and my
breathing short and sharp, as though I had been r unning .

I kept swallowing saliva, feeling for some curious reason
that by doing so I would stop my heart beating so. It
made me terribly thirsty and after a while I got up, went
to the washbasin, and drank some water out of the
tooth glass. Then I went back and pushed the lid of my
suitcase down with my foot. As I did so I felt the piece
of paper Beghin had given me crackle in my pocket. I
sat down on the bed.

I must have sat staring blankly at Beghin’s list for well
over an hour. I read it and re-read it. The names became
ciphers, meaningless arrangements of shapes. I shut my
eyes, opened them, and read again, I did not know these
people. I had spent one day in the hotel. It was a hotel
with large grounds. I had exchanged nods with them at
mealtimes. No more. With my bad memory for faces I
could probably have passed all of them in the street with¬
out recognising one. Yet one of the persons represented
by those names had my camera. One of those who had
nodded to me was a spy. One of them had been paid to
make his or her way secretly into military zones, to take


photographs of reinforced concrete and guns so that some
day warships out at sea might safely and accurately fire
shells to smash to pieces the concrete and the guns and
the men who served them. And I had two days in which
to identify that person.

Their names, I thought stupidly, looked very harmless.


Monsieur Robert Duclos

French

Nantes

Monsieur Andre Roux
Mademoiselle Odette

French

Paris

Martin .

French

Paris

Miss Mary Skelton . .

American

Washington, D.C.

Mr Warren Skelton . .

American

Washington, D.C.

Herr Walter Vogel . .

Swiss

Constance

Frau Hulde Vogel . .

Major Herbert Clandon-

Swiss

Constance

Hartley .

Mrs Maria Clandon-

English

Buxton

Hartley .

English

Buxton

Herr Emil Schimler

German

Berlin

Albert Koche (manager)

Swiss

Schaffhausen

Suzanne Koche (wife) .

Swiss

Schaffhausen


A similar list of guests might have been compiled
from almost any other small pension in the south of
France. There was the inevitable English army man and
his wife. There were the Americans, not quite so inevit¬
able, but by no means unusual. There were the Swiss,
and there was the sprinkling of French. The solitary
German was odd, but not unduly so. Swiss hotel
managers and their wives were common enough.

What was I to do? Where should I start? Then I
remembered Beghin’s instructions about the cameras. I


43



was to find out which of them had cameras and then
report. This at least was a positive line of thought.

The obvious method seemed to be to engage them in
conversation one by one, or couple by couple, and bring
up the subject of photography. But that was no use.
Supposing the spy had already discovered that his photo¬
graphs were missing, that instead of his pictures of con¬
crete and guns he had some lively low-angle shots of a
carnival at Nice? Even if he did not immediately realise
that he had somebody else’s camera, he would know that
something had gone wrong and be on his guard. Anyone
attempting to get conversational on the subject of photo¬
graphy would excite his suspicions. I must proceed by less
direct means.

I glanced at my watch. The time was a quarter to
seven. From the window I could see that the beach was
still occupied. There were a pair of shoes and a small
sunshade lying on the strip of sand visible from my room.
I combed my hair and went out.

Some people can strike up casual acquaintances with
the greatest ease. They possess some mysterious flexible
quality of mind that enables them to adjust their mental
processes rapidly to conform with those of the strangers
facing them. In an instant they have identified themselves
with the stranger’s interests. They smile. The strangers
respond. There is a question and a reply. A minute later
they are friends, chatting away amicably of trifles.

I do not possess this engaging faculty. I do not speak
at all unless spoken to. Even then, nervousness allied to
a desperate wish to be friendly renders me either stiff
and formal or over-effusive. As a result of this, strangers
either think me morose or suspect me of trying to work
a confidence trick.



As I walked down the stone steps to the beach, how¬
ever, I made up my mind that, for once at any rate, I
would have to shed my inhibitions. I must be confident
and friendly, I must think of amusing thing s to say, I
must manage the conversation, be subtle. I had work to
do.

The small beach was now in complete shadow and a
faint breeze off the sea was be ginnin g to stir the tops of
the trees; but it was still very warm. I could see the heads
of two men and two women over the backs of the deck¬
chairs in which their owners were sitting; and as I neared
the foot of the steps I could hear that they were attempt¬
ing to carry on a conversation in French.

I walked across the sand, sat a few metres from them
on the end of one of the trestles on which the dinghy
was being painted, and gazed out across the bay.

From the quick look I had got in as I sat down I knew
that in the two chairs nearest me were a young man of
about twenty-three and a girl of about twenty. They had
been swimming, and it was evidendy their brown legs
that I had seen from the terrace that morning. I judged
from their French that these were the two Americans,
Warren and Mary Skelton.

The other two were very different. Both were middle-
aged and very fat. I remembered having noticed them
before. The man had a beaming moonlike face and a
torso that from a distance looked almost spherical. This
illusion was due in some measure to the trousers he
wore. They were of some dark material and had very
short, narrow legs. The tops of them, already very high,
were drawn up over his round belly almost to his arm-
pits by very powerful braces. He wore a tennis shirt
open at the neck and no jacket. He might have walked


45





out of a cartoon in Simplicissimus. His wife, for these 1

were the Swiss, was slightly taller than him and very
untidy. She laughed a great deal and even when she was
not actually laughing she looked as if she was about to
do so. Her husband beamed in concert with her. They ;
both appeared as simple and unselfconscious as a pair of
small children.

It seemed that Skelton was trying to explain the
American political system to Herr Vogel.

c Il y a, he was saying laboriously, ‘deux parties seule-
ment, les Republicaines et les Democrates. Ces sont du
droit—tons les deux. Mais les Republicaines sont plus au
droit que les Democrates. Qa c’est la difference .’

‘Ah oui } je comprendj said Herr Vogel. He hurriedly
translated the sense into German. Frau Vogel grinned
broadly.

‘One hears,’ pursued her husband in his clipped
French, ‘that the gangsters (he pronounced it ‘garng-
stairs’) have a decisive influence during the elections.
Like a party of the centre, perhaps?’ He had the air of
one putting aside frivolous small talk in favour of graver
• matters.

The girl giggled helplessly. Her brother drew a deep
breath and began to explain with great care, and to Herr
Vogel’s evident amazement, that ninety-nine point nine v -
per cent of the people of the United States had never
seen a gangster. But his French soon gave out.

‘II y a, sans doute,’’ he was admitting, ‘une quantite
de ... quelque ...’ He could get no farther. ‘Mary,’ he
said plaintively, ‘what the hell’s the word for graft?’

At that moment fortune favoured me. It may be that
teaching becomes a habit, that the impulse to instruct
will, like hunger or fear, overcome social inhibitions. Out


of the comer of my eye I saw the girl shrug her shoulders
helplessly; a fraction of a second later the words were
out of my mouth.

‘Chantage is the word you want.’

They all looked at me.

‘Thanks,’ said the girl.

An eager light came into her brother’s eye.

‘Do you speak French as well as English?’

‘Yes.’

‘Then,’ he said grimly, ‘do you min d tellin g fatso here
on our left that gangster is spelt with a s mall “g” in
America, and they’re not represented in Congress. At
least, not openly. You might add, too, while you’re about
it, that all our food doesn’t come out of cans, and that
we don’t all live in the Empire State Building.’

‘Certainly.’

The girl smiled.

‘My brother’s not serious.’

‘Aren’t I, by heaven! He’s an international menace.
Someone ought to tell him.’

The Vogels had been listening to this exchange with
bewildered smiles on their faces. I translated, as tactfully
as possible, into German. They rocked with laughter.
Between paroxysms, Herr Vogel explained that it was
impossible not to tease Americans. A party of garngstair !
The Empire State Building! There were fresh peals of
laughter. The Swiss were evidently not quite so naive as
they looked.

‘What’s the matter with him now?’ demanded Skelton.

I explained. He grinned.

‘You wouldn’t think they had any guile in them, would
you?’ he said, and leaned forward to get a better view
of the Vogels. ‘What are they, Germans?’


47




‘Swiss, I think.’

‘Poppa,’ remarked the girl, ‘looks exactly like Ten-
niel’s illustration of Tweedledum and Tweedledee.’

The object of these criticisms was regarding us anxi¬
ously. He addressed himself to me.

‘Die jungen Leute haben unseren kleinen Spass nicht
iibel genommen?'

‘He says,’ I explained to the Skeltons, ‘that he hopes
he hasn’t offended you.’

Young Skelton looked startled.

‘Hell, no. Look—’ He turned to the Vogels. ‘ Nous
sommes tres amuses, Sie sind sehr liebenswurdig ,’ he
said heartily. Then: ‘Oh, tell him, will you?’

I did so. There was a great deal of nodding and
smiling. Then the Vogels began to talk between them¬
selves.

‘How many languages do you speak?’ said Skelton

‘Five.’

He laughed disgustedly.

‘Then would you explain very carefully,’ put in the girl,
‘just how you learn a foreign language? I don’t want five.
But if you could think in terms of ones for a moment,
my brother and I would be interested.’

I muttered something about living in countries and
cultivating a ‘language ear’, and asked them if they had
been at the Reserve long.

‘Oh, we’ve been here a week or so now,’ he replied.
‘Our parents are coming over from home next week on
the Conte di Savoia. We’re meeting them at Marseilles.
You arrived Tuesday, didn’t you^’

‘Yes.’

Well, I’m glad we can talk to someone in English
Koche is not bad with his English, but he’s got no stay-

48




mg power. We’ve only had that British major and his
wife. He’s high-hat and she doesn’t speak at all.’

‘Which could be lucky, too,’ said his sister.

She was, I was realising, though far from pretty, ex¬
tremely attractive. Her mouth was too wide, her nose was
not quite symmetrical, and her face was flat, with over-
prominent cheekbones. But there was humour and in¬
telligence in the way the lips moved, and the nose and
cheekbones were good. The skin of her body was firm
and clear and brown, while the thick mass of tawny fair
hair crushed forward by the back of the deck-chair
gleamed in a most interesting way. She was almost
beautiful.

‘The trouble with the French,’ her brother was saying,
‘is that they get mad if you can’t speak their language
properly. I don’t get mad if a Frenchman can’t speak
English.’

‘No, but that’s because most ordinary Frenchmen like
the sound of their language. They don’t like listening to
a bad French accent any more than you like listening to
a beginner practising on a violin.’

‘It’s no use appealing to his musical ear,’ commented
the girl. ‘He’s tone deaf.’ She got up and smoothed out
her bathing suit. ‘Well,’ she said, ‘I guess we’d better be
getting some more clothes on.’

Herr Vogel heaved him self out of his chair, consulted
an enormous watch, and announced in French that it was
seven fifteen. Then he hitched up his braces another
notch and began to collect his and his wife’s belongings.
We all went in procession to the steps. I found myself
beh in d the American.

‘By the way, sir,’ he said as we started up, ‘I didn’t
catch your name.’


D


49


‘Josef Vadassy.

‘Mine’s Warren Skelton. This is my sister Mary.’

But I barely heard him. Slung across Herr Vogel’s
plump back was a camera, and I was trying to recollect
where I had seen another one like it. Then I remembered.
It was a box-type Voigtlander.

On very warm nights, dinner at the Reserve was
served on the terrace. A striped awning was put up for
the purpose and illumination was provided by candles on
the tables. It looked very gay when they were all alight.

I had madfi up my mind to be the first on the terrace
that evening. For one thing, I was hungry. For another,
I wanted to inspect my fellow guests one at a time. Three
of them, however, were already in their places when I
arrived.

One of them, a man sitting alone, was* placed behind
me so that I could not see him except by turning right
round in my chair. I took in as much as possible of his
appearance as I walked to my table.

The candle on his table and the fact that he was bend¬
ing forward over his plate prevented my seeing much of
him except a head of short, greying fair hair brushed
sideways without a parting. He was wearing a white shirt
and a pair of coarse linen trousers of obviously French
manufacture.

I sat down and turned my attention to the other two.

They sat very stiffly, facing one another across their
table, he a narrow-headed man with grizzled brown hair
and a clipped moustache, she an impassive middle-aged
woman with large bones, a sallow complexion, and a head
of neatly dressed white hair. Both had changed for dinner.
She wore a white blouse and black skirt. He had put on


50


grey flannel trousers, a striped shirt with a regimental
tie, and a tweed jacket. As I watched him he put down
his soup spoon, picked up a bottle of Beaujolais from
the table, and held it to the light.

‘I do believe, my dear,’ I heard him say, ‘that the
waiters drink our wine. I marked this bottle most care¬
fully at luncheon.’

He had a penetrating upper-middle-class English voice.
The woman shrugged her shoulders ever so slightly.
Obviously she did not approve.

‘My dear,’ he replied, ‘it’s the principle of the thing
that I look at. They ought to be pulled up about it. I
shall drop a hint to Koche.’

I saw her shrug her shoulders again and dab her mouth
with her napkin. This was evidently Major and Mrs*
Clandon-Hartley.

The other guests had by this time begun to arrive.

The Vogels sat at a table beyond the two English and
beside the balustrade. Another couple made for the table
against the wall.

These were unmistakably French. The man, very dark
and with goitrous eyes and an unshaven chin, looked
about thirty-five. The woman, an emaciated blonde in
satin beach pyjamas and imitation pearl ear-rings the size
of grapes, might have been older. They were very in¬
terested in one another. As he held the chair for her to
sit down he caressed her arm. She responded with a
furtive squeeze of his fingers, then looked round quickly
to see if the other guests had noticed. I saw that the
Vogels were convulsed with silent laughter at the incident.
Herr Vogel winked at me across the tables.

The blonde woman, I decided, was probably Odette
Martin. Her companion would be either Duclos or Roux.


51









Mary Skelton and her brother came next. They nodded
amicably and went to a table behind me on my right.
There was only one more to come. He proved to be an
elderly man with a white beard and wearing pince-nez
attached to a broad, black ribbon.

When the waiter took my soup plate I stopped him

‘Who is the gentleman with the white beard?’

‘That is Monsieur Duclos.’

‘And the gentleman with the blonde?’

The waiter smiled discreetly.

‘Monsieur Roux and Mademoiselle Martin.’ He placed
a faint emphasis on the ‘mademoiselle’.

‘I see. Which, then, is Herr Schimler?’

He raised his eyebrows.

‘Herr Schimler, Monsieur? There is no one of that
name at the Reserve.’

‘You are sure?’

‘Perfectly, Monsieur.’

I glanced over my shoulder.

‘Who is the gentleman at the end table?’

‘That is Monsieur Paul Heinberger, a Swiss writer
and a friend of Monsieur Koche. Will you take fish
Monsieur?

I nodded and he hurried away.

For a second or two I sat still. Then, calmly but with
a hand that trembled, I felt in my pocket for Beghin’s
list, enveloped it in my napkin, looked down and read
it through carefully.

But already I knew it off by heart. The name of Hein¬
berger was not on it.


52



5

I am afraid that I lost my head a little. As I ate my fish
my imagination began to run riot. I gloated over the
scene with Beghin that would follow my revelation.

I would be cool and patronising.

‘Now, Monsieur Beghin,’ I would say. ‘When you gave
me this list I naturally assumed that it contained the
names of all the visitors to the Reserve apart from the
staff. The first thing I find is this Paul Heinberger un¬
accounted for. What do you know of him? Why is he not
registered? Those are questions that should be answered
without delay. And, my friend, I advise you to look over
his belongings. I shall be extremely surprised if you do
not find among them a Zeiss Ikon Contax camera and a
spool of film with some photographs of a carnival at
Nice on it.’

The waiter took my plate away.

Another thing, Beghin. Investigate Koche. The waiter
says that Heinberger is a friend of Koche. That means
that this manager is implicated. I am not surprised. I had
already noticed that he took a suspicious interest in my
camera. He is well worth examination. You thought you
knew all about him, eh? Well, I should investigate a
little more carefully if I were you. Dangerous to j um p
to conclusions, my friend.’

The waiter brought me a large portion of the coq au
vin a la Reserve.


53







‘Always investigate a man with a name like Heinberger
my dear Beghin. 5 3

No, too clumsy. Perhaps a mocking smile would be
best. I experimented with a mocking smile and was in
the middle of the fourth attempt when the waiter caught
my eye. He hurried over anxiously.

‘There is something wrong with the coq au vin
Monsieur?’ ’

‘No, no. It is excellent.’

‘Pardon, Monsieur.’

‘Not at all.’


Blushing, I got on with my food.

But the interruption had brought me to earth. Had I,
after all, made such an important discovery? This Paul
Heinberger might have arrived that very afternoon. If
that was the case, the hotel could not yet have furnished
the police with particulars of his passport. But where
then, was Emil Schimler? The waiter had been very
positive that nobody of that name was staying at the
hotel. Perhaps he had made a mistake. Perhaps the police
had made a mistake. In any case, I could do nothing but
report to Beghin in the morning. I must wait. And mean¬
while^ time was going, I could not telephone until nine
o clock at the earliest. Over twelve hours wasted. Twelve
out of about sixty. I had been crazy to think that I could
get away by Sunday. If only I could write to Monsieur
Mathis and explain, or He, say that I was ill. But it was
hopeless. What could I do? This man who had my
camera he wouldn’t be a fool. Spies were clever, cun¬
ning men. What could I hope to find out? Sixty hours!
It might just as well be sixty seconds.

The waiter took my plate away. As he did so he glanced
disapprovingly at my hands. I looked down and found


54


that my fingers, fumbling with a dessert spoon, had bent
it. I straightened it hurriedly, stood up, and left the
terrace. I was no longer hungry.

I walked through the house into the gardens. In one
of the lower terraces overlooking the beach there was a
small alcove. It was usually deserted. I went to it.

The sun had gone and it was dark. Above the hills
across the bay stars were already shining. The breeze had
stiffened a little and carried a faint smell of seaweed with
it. I rested my hot hands on the cold brickwork of
the parapet and let the breeze blow on my face. Some¬
where in the garden behind me a frog was croaking.
The sea lapping gently at the sand made scarcely a
sound.

Out at sea a light winked and disappeared. Ships ex¬
changing signals, perhaps. One, maybe, a passenger liner,
rustling swiftly through the oily sea on its way east, the
other a cargo boat, travelling light with a half-submerged
screw, thrashing its way towards Marseilles. -On the liner
they might be dancing now or leaning on the rails of the
promenade deck watching the moon on the wake and
listening to the water bubbling and hissing against the
plates. Below their feet, deep down, would be half-naked
lascars sweating amidst the roar of oil-fired boilers and
the thudding of propellers. The headlights of a car swept
the road round the bay, gleamed on the water for an
instant, and were lost among the trees as the car headed
for Toulon. If only I ...

A shoe grated on the gravel slope behind, and some¬
one began to descend the steps leading to the terrace.
The footsteps reached the bottom. I prayed that their
owner would turn to the right, away from me. There was
silence, a hesitation. Then I heard a rusde as a piece of


55






creeper overhanging the path to the alcove was pushed
aside and I saw a man’s head and shoulders faintly out¬
lined against the blue-black of the sky. It was the Major.

I saw him peer at me uncertainly. Then he leaned on
the parapet and looked out across the bay.

My first impulse was to leave. I did not feel in the
least like talking to Major Herbert Clandon-Hardey of
Buxton. Then I remembered young Skelton’s comment
on the Major. The man was ‘high-hat’. It was unlikely
that he would speak first. But I was wrong.

We must have stood there leaning on the parapet for
ten min utes before he spoke. I had, indeed, almost for¬
gotten his existence when suddenly he cleared his throat
and remarked that it was a fine evening.

I agreed.

There was another long silence.

‘Cool for August,’ he said at last.

‘I suppose so.’ I wondered whether he had been think¬
ing the point over and really did consider it cool or
whether the comment was purely formal. If he really
thought it cool I ought for politeness’ sake to draw
attention to the breeze.

‘Staying long?’

‘A day or so.’

‘May see something of you, then.’

‘That would be pleasant.’

You would scarcely call this‘high-hat’.

‘Shouldn’t have thought you were a Britisher. But I
heard you talking to that young American just before
dinner. If you don’t mind my saying so, you don’t look
British.’

‘There is no reason why I should mind your saying so.
I am a Hungarian.’


56




‘Are you now! I thought you were British. My good
lady said no, but she hadn’t heard you speak.’

‘I spent some years in England.’

‘Oh, I see. That accounts for it. In the war?’

‘I was too young.’

‘Ah, yes, you would be. Difficult for us old stagers to
realise now that the war’s all ancient history. Went right
through from fourteen to eighteen myself. Just got my
battalion in time for the March offensive in pighi-ppn
Got put out of action a week later. Just my luck. Reverted
to second-in-command and invalided out. Never had any¬
thing to do with your lot, though. Heard the Austrians
are damned good soldiers.’

This did not seem to call for a reply on my part,
and there was silence again. He broke it with an odd
question.

‘What do you think of our respected manager?’

‘Who? Koche?’

‘That’s how you fellows pronounce it, is it? Yes,
Koche.’

‘Well, I don’t know. He seems a very competent man¬
ager, but—’

‘Exactly! But! Slovenly, untidy, lets those d amn waiters
do what they like. They pinch your wine, you know. I’ve
caught ’em at it. Koche ought to put some ginger into
them.’

‘The food is very good.’

‘I dare say it is, but you’ve got to have more than good
food to be comfortable. If this place was mine I’d put
some ginger into things. Have you talked to Koche
much?’

‘No.’

‘I’ll tell you something funny about him. My good

57









lady and I were in Toulon the other day doing some
shopping. We’d finished what we had to do and went into
a cafe for an apperitivo. Well, we’d just ordered when
along comes Koche, walking faster than I’d ever seen him
move before. He doesn’t see us, and I was just going to
call him over for a drink when he crosses the road and
ducks down the side street facing us. Then he walks two
or three doors down, gives a quick look round to see if
anyone’s looking and goes through a doorway. Well, we
had our drink and I kept my eye on that doorway, but he
never came out. But what do you think? When we get
to the bus terminus there he is, as large as life, sittine
in the St Gatien bus.’

‘Extraordinary,’ I murmured.

‘That’s what we thought. And I must say we were a
bit bowled over.’

‘Naturally.’

‘You haven’t heard the best of it, though. You know
his wife?’

‘No.’

‘A regular tartar. She’s French and older than he is,
and I think she’s got a bit of money. Anyway, she keeps
our Albert right under her thumb. He likes going down
to the beach with the guests and bathing. Well, she’s
looking after the ordering and the chambermaids and
likes to have him where she can keep her eye on him.
So by the time he’s been down on the beach for ten
minutes she’s usually hanging over the terrace at the top
yelling at him to come up. In front of all the guests, too!
That s the sort of woman she is. You can’t help noticing
it, and you’d th i nk Koche would be embarrassed. But not
he. He just grins—you know, that sleepy grin of his;
mutters something in French which must be pretty hot,

58



judging by the way the Frogs start laughing, and does
what he’s told.

‘Anyway, we got on the bus and said how do you do.
Well, naturally we couldn’t resist telling him that we’d
thought we’d seen him in the town. I don’t mind telling
you I was watching him pretty closely, but, would you
believe it, the fellow didn’t bat an eyelid!’

I murmured amazement.

‘It’s a fact. Didn’t bat an eyelid. Of course, I thought
he was just going to deny the whole thing and say we’d
been mistaken. You see, my good lady and I had thought
at once that the place he’d gone to was one of those sailors’
houses with two entrances, and that he’d got a bit of
goods there. It was damned embarrassing.’

‘How do you mean?’

‘Well, you see, the fellow didn’t deny it at all. He was
as cool as you please. He said that he didn’t care for his
wife very much and that he had a brunette there he
liked better. Well, that was a bit of a facer. But when he
went on to tell us all about her charms in that sleepy,
grinning way of his, I thought it was time to stop. My
good lady’s a bit religious, and I had to hint pretty broadly
that we’d rather not hear about it.’ The Major looked up
at the stars. ‘Women are a bit touchy about some things,’
he added.

‘I suppose so,’ was all I could think of to say.

‘Funny creatures, women,’ he mused, then uttered a
short, self-conscious laugh. ‘Still,’ he went on facetiously,
‘if you’re a Hungarian, you probably know more about
women than an old soldier like me. By the way, my name’s
Clandon-Hartley.’

‘Mine is Vadassy.’

‘Well, Mr Vadassy, I shall have to be getting inside


59










now. Night air’s supposed to be bad for me. Usually play
Russian billiards in die evening with that old Frenchman,
Duclos. As far as I can make out he’s got a fruit-canning
factory in Nantes. But my French is not too good. He
may be only the manager. Nice old boy, but he’s always
giving himself a few extra points when he thinks you
aren’t looking. Get’s on your nerves after a bit.’

‘It must do.’

‘Well, me for bed. Those young Americans have got
the table this evening. Pretty girl, and a nice lad. But he
talks too much. Do some of these young fellows good to be
under my old colonel. Speak when you’re spoken to was
the rule for junior officers. Well, good night to you.’

‘Good night.’

He went. When he reached the top of the steps he
began to cough. It was an ugly sound. As his footsteps
died away up the path he was still gasping and choking.
I had heard a cough like that once before. The owner of
it had been gassed at Verdun.

For a long time there was silence. I smoked several
cigarettes. Investigate Koche! Well, Beghin certainly had
something to investigate.

The moon had risen and I could see the outlines of the
clumps of bamboo canes below. A little to the right of
them there was a patch of beach. As I watched, the
shadows moved and I heard a woman’s laugh. It was a
soft, agreeable sound, half amused, half tender. A couple
came up into the patch of light. I saw the man stop and
pull the woman towards him. Then he took her head in
his hands and kissed her eyes and mouth. It was the un¬
shaven Frenchman and his blonde.

For a while I watched them. They were talking. Then
they sat down on the sand and he lit a cigarette for her.

60



I looked at my watch. It was half past ten. I crushed out
my cigarette and walked along the terrace and up the steps.

The path was steep and winding. I went up slowly
with my hand before my face to ward off the twigs that
projected from the bushes on either side. Between the
top of the path and the entrance to the house there was
a small paved forecourt. My leather sandals were soft
with use and my footsteps made no sound. I was halfway
to the door when I stopped and stood perfecdy still. The
hall was in darkness except for a light streaming through
the glass partition of Koche’s office. The door of the office

was open and from inside came the sound of voices_

Koche s voice and that of another man. They were speak¬
ing in German.

‘I will try again tomorrow,’ Koche was sayin g, ‘but I
am afraid it is useless.’

There was a pause. Then the other man spoke. He
had a deeper voice, but he spoke so quietly that I could
scarcely hear him.

‘You must keep trying for me,’ he said slowly. ‘I must
know what has happened. I must know what I have to do.’

Again a pause. When Koche spoke there was a curious
quality of softness in his voice that I had not noticed
before.

‘There is nothing you can do, Emil. You can only
wait.’

Emil! I could barely contain my excitement. But the
other man, Emil, was speaking again.

‘I have already waited too long.’

Another pause. There was an odd, emotional quality
in those pauses.

‘Very well, Emil. I will try again. Good night. Sleep
well.’


61






But the other did not answer. There was a step in
the hall and, my heart thumping against my ribs, I
moved quickly into the shadow of the wall. A man ram ?
out and stood for an instant in the doorway. I recognised
his clothes but his face I had not seen before. It was the
man whom the waiter had called Heinberger.

He walked quickly down the path to the terrace, yet
as the light shone for that brief instant on his face I had
seen a thin, firm mouth, a strong jaw, sunken cheeks, a
fine, broad forehead. But these things were incidental. I
scarcely noticed them. For I had seen something else,
something that I had not seen since I had left Hungary:
the eyes of a human being with nothing left to hope for
but death to end his misery.

When I got to my room I opened the shutters, drew
the curtains and sank into bed with a sigh of relief.
I was very, very tired.

For a time I lay with my eyes shut, waiting for
sleep. But my mind was too busy for oblivion. My head
was hot, and the pillow became warm and sticky. I turned
and twisted. I opened my eyes, closed them again. Paul
Heinberger was Emil Schimler. Emil Schimler was Paul
Heinberger. Koche must keep trying. Schimler must know
what had happened. Schimler and Koche. Spies, both of
them. I had discovered the truth. Beghin must know. To¬
morrow morning. A long time to wait. Early. Six o’clock.
No, the post office would not be open and Beghin would
be in bed. Beghin in pyjamas. He should know immedi¬
ately. Absurd. Heavens, but I was tired. Must go to sleep.
Heinberger was Schimler. Spies.

I got out of bed, put on a bathing-wrap, and sat by the
window.

Heinberger was Schimler. He must be arrested without



delay. On what charge? Giving the police a false name?
The police had his correct name. Emil Schimler—German
—Berlin. A waiter had told me that his nam P was Hein-
berger. Was it an offence to tell people that one’s name
was Heinberger if one’s name was really Schimler? Could
I, Vadassy, say that my name was Karl Marx or George
Higgins if I wished? What did it matter? Schimler and
Koche were spies. They must be spies. They had my
camera. And now they were wondering what had become
of their photographs.

Yet I could not quite rid myself of the suspicion that
the look on Schimler’s face had nothing to do with cameras
or photographs. There was, too, something about the
man, something about his voice, the look of him, that
But then you couldn’t expect a spy to look like a spy—
however a spy was supposed to look. He didn’t advertise
his trade. All over Europe, all over the world, men were
spying, while in government offices other men were tabu¬
lating the results of the spies’ labours: thicknesses of
armour plating, elevation angles of guns, muzzle velocities,
details of fire-control mechanisms and rangefinders, fuse
efficiencies, details of fortifications, positions of ammuni¬
tion stores, disposition of key factories, landmarks for
bombers. The world was getting ready to go to war. For
the spies, business was good. It might be profitable to
start a bureau of espionage, a sort of central clearing-house
for all this vital information. I had a vision of Koche walk¬
ing quickly down a side street, turning into a doorway,
and leaving by another exit. Would he have been quite
so ready to admit to a mistress if she had really existed?
Anyone but a fool like this English major would have
seen that. I knew better. Headquarters in Toulon. Koche
and Schimler. Schimler and Koche. Spies.

63










I shivered. The night was getting cold. I went back
to bed.

Then, as my eyes closed once more, a new fear began
to gather in my mind, turning over and over, growing
bigger, a terrible possibility. Supposing one of the guests
left the hotel?

It might easily happen. Tomorrow, Herr Vogel or
Monsieur Duclos or Roux and his blonde, any of them,
might say : ‘I have decided to leave at once.’ For all I
knew one of them might already have his luggage packed
to leave in the morning. What could I do to stop him?
Supposing I were wrong about Koche and Schimler. Sup¬
posing that Roux and his blonde were foreign agents with
false French passports. Supposing that the Americans or
the Swiss or the English were spies. They would slip
through my fingers. No use to tell myself that I would
deal with the question when it arose. That might be too
late. What exactly should I do? Quickly now! Imagine-
they’re all going, leaving you here alone in the mornin g .
What would you do? Get a pistol from Beghin. Yes,
that was it, get a pistol from Beghin. Stand no nonsense.
‘Stand where you are or I’ll fill your guts with lead.’
Ten rounds in the magazine. ‘One for each of you.’ No,
eight rounds in the magazine. It depended on the type
of pistol. I would need two.

I threw back the clothes and sat up. At this rate I
should be a lunatic by the morning. I went to the wash¬
basin and sluiced my face with cold water. I must, I
told myself, have been dreaming. But I knew perfectly
well that I had not been to sleep.

I drew back the curtains and looked out at the pine trees
with the moonlight on them. I must examine the facts
calmly—coolly and calmly. What exactly had Beghin said?

64



I must have stood there a very long time. When I
finally went back to bed the sky across the bay was begin¬
ning to lighten. I was stiff with cold, but my mind was
at rest. For I had a plan, and to my tired brain it seemed
infallible.

As I closed my eyes once more a thought crossed my
mind. There was something that English major had said
that I had found curious, something quite small. But I
no longer cared. I went to sleep.


E


65






6


I awoke with a headache.

I had forgotten to redraw the curtains and the early
morning sun streaming through the open windows was
already hot. It was going to be a warm day. And I had a
lot to do. At the first possible moment I must telephone
to Beghin. Then I must put my plan into operation. I
was pleased to find it appeared as foolproof now as it had
in the darkness of the small hours. I began to feel better.

I was early down on the terrace, and as I ate my
croissants and drank my coffee I congratulated myself.
Here was I, a teacher of languages with a nervous dis¬
position and a dread of violence, evolving within a few
hours a neat, clever plan for the capture of a dangerous
spy. And I had been harrying myself with fears of being
unable to reach Paris by Monday mo rnin g ! After my

second cup of coffee even my headache began to dis¬
appear.

The Vogels were sitting down at their table as I passed
on my way out. I stopped, and said good mor nin g

Then I noticed that they were both looking uncom¬
monly serious. Their smiles as they acknowledged my
greeting were automatic and very watery. Herr Vogel
must have noticed my curious glance.

‘We are not happy this morning,’ he said.

‘Oh 5 Fin sorry. 5

‘We have had bad news from Switzerland.’ He patted

66


a letter lying on the table. ‘A dear friend has died. You
must excuse us, please, if we seem a litde distrait.’

‘Naturally. I am very sorry.’

They were obviously itching to be rid of me. I passed
on. Then other things drove them from my mind. I
was being followed.

The post office was situated in the grocer’s shop at
the bottom of the village. As I walked down the hill, I
became conscious of a man sauntering along a few paces
behind me. I stopped outside the first cafe and looked
back. He had also stopped. It was the detective who had
arrested me the day before. He nodded g enially to me.

I sat down at one of the tables and he came over
and sat two tables away. I beckoned to him. He moved
up. His manner was friendly.

‘Good morning,’ I said. ‘I suppose you have been told
to follow me?’

He nodded. ‘Unfortunately, yes. I find it very
fatiguing.’ He glanced down at his Sunday blacks. ‘This
suit is very hot.’

‘Then why do you wear it?’

His long, cunning, peasant’s face became suddenly
solemn.

‘I am in mourning for my mother. It is only four
months since she died. She had a stone.’

The waiter approached.

‘What will you have to drink?’

He thought for a moment, then asked for a limonade
gazeuse. I told the waiter to get it, and stood up.

‘Now then,’ I said, ‘I am going to the post office down
the street to telephone Monsieur Beghin. I shall be out
of your sight for less than five minutes. You sit here and
have your drink. I will join you on my return.’

67






He shook his head. ‘It is my duty to follow you.’

‘I know, but everyone in the village will know that you
are following me. I do not like that.’

A mulish look came into his face.

‘My orders are to follow you. I am not to be bribed.’

‘I am not attempting to bribe you. I am asking you to
consider your own comfort and mine.’

He shook his head again.

‘I know my duty.’

‘Very well.’ I walked out of the cafe and on down the
street. As I went I heard him arguing with the waiter
over the responsibility for the limonade gazeuse.

The telephone in the post office was public in every
sense of the word. It was flanked on one side by a pasrg df
of garlic sausages hanging from the ceiling; on the other
side by a pile of empty meal sacks. There was no cabinet.
As I cupped my hand round the transmitter and mur¬
mured ‘Police Station’ into the mouthpiece, it seemed to
me that the whole of St Gatien stooped to listen.

‘Poste Administratif ,’ said a voice at last.

‘Monsieur Beghin?’

‘11 est sorti.'

‘Monsieur le Comrmssaire?'

‘De la part de qui ?’

‘Monsieur Vadassy.'

‘Ne quittez pas '

I waited. Then the Commissaire’s voice came on.

‘Hello! Vadassy?’

‘Yes.’

‘Have you anything to report?’

‘Yes.’

Telephone Toulon Ville eighty-three, fifty-five and ask
for Monsieur Beghin.


68


‘Very well.’

He hung up. Evidently the Commissaire’s responsi¬
bility ended with seeing that I remained in St Gatien. I
asked for Toulon Ville 83-55. My request produced a
curious effect. Within less than a minute I was connected.
Another few seconds and I was speaking to Beghin. His
voice squeaked irritably over the wire.

‘Who gave you this number?’

‘The Commissaire.’

‘Have you obtained the information about the cameras?’

‘Not yet.’

‘Then why are you bothering me?’

‘I have discovered something.’

‘Well?’

‘The German, Emil Schimler, is calling himself Paul
Heinberger. I overheard a conversation between him and
Koche which sounded suspicious. There is no doubt that
Schimler is the spy and that Koche is his accomplice.
Koche also visits a house in Toulon. He states that he has
a woman there; but this may be untrue.’

Even as I said it I felt my self-confidence dra inin g
away like water from a sieve. How very stupid it all
sounded. Over the wire came a sound that I could have
sworn was a hastily suppressed laugh. But what followed
showed me that I had been mistaken.

‘Listen,’ squeaked Beghin’s voice angrily, ‘you were
given certain instructions. You were told to find out which
of the guests had cameras. You were not asked to think
or to play detectives. You had your instructions. They
were clear and straightforward. Why have you not carried
them out? Do you want to go back to your cell? I want
no more of this nonsense. Return to the Reserve immedi¬
ately, question the guests, and give me the information I








require the moment you have it. In all other matters min ^
your own business. You understand?’ He hung up abruptly.

The man who owned the grocery shop which accommo¬
dated the post office was looking at me curiously. In my
anxiety to impress Beghin with the importance of dis¬
coveries I must have raised my voice. I scowled at him
and left the shop.

Outside, red in the face with heat and annoyance, was
my detective. As I stalked off furiously up the street he
lumbered along at my elbow hissing in my ear that I
owed him eighty-five centimes plus pourboirc, one franc,
twenty-five in all. I had commanded the limonade gazeuse,
he kept repeating, it was my duty to pay for it. He him¬
self would not have ordered a limonade gazeuse unless I
had invited him to do so. He was not allowed expenses by
the government. I must pay the one franc, twenty-five.
There was eighty-five centimes for the limonade gazeuse
with a pourboire of eight sous only in addition. He was
a poor man. He knew his duty. He would not be bribed.

I scarcely heard him. So I was to question the guests
and find out which of them had cameras! It was madness.
Obviously the spy would take fright and leave. Beghin
was a fool and I was in his hands. My whole existence
depended upon him. Mind my own business! But the
capture of the spy was my business. I had everything to
lose if he escaped. One had always heard that Intelligence
Departments were noted for their stupidity. Here was
evidence of that fact. If I had to trust myself to Beghin
and the Department of Naval Intelligence in Toulon my
chances of getting to Paris on Monday were remote. No,
I would do my own thinking. It was safer. Schimler and
Koche must be unmasked. And I must do the unmask¬
ing. I would carry out my plan as I had originally intended.


70



Beghin would look very foolish when I presented him with
the evidence he needed. As for finding out about the
cameras, well, I was not going to do any direct question¬
ing. I would get the information; there was no harm in
that. But I would get it discreetly.

‘Eighty-five centimes plus a pourboire of eight sous_’

We had reached the gates of the Reserve. I gave the
detective a two-franc piece and went in.

At the entrance I met the Skeltons coming out. They
wore bathing suits and were carrying wraps, newspapers,
and bottles of sun oil.

‘Hallo there! ’ said he.

The girl smiled a greeting.

I said hallo.

‘Are you coming down to the beach?’

‘I’ll go and change and follow you down.’

‘Don’t forget to bring your English with you,’ he
shouted after me, and I heard his sister telling him to
‘lay off the nice gentleman.’

A few minutes later I came down again and started
across the gardens to the steps leading to the beach.
Then I had my first piece of luck.

I had nearly reached the first terrace when excited
voices were raised ahead. The next moment Monsieur
Duclos appeared hurrying anxiously towards the hotel.
A moment or two later Warren Skelton dashed up the
steps and flew after him. As he passed by he flung a
sentence over his shoulder. I caught the word ‘camera’.

I hurried down to the terrace. Then I understood the
reason for the stampede.

Sweeping into the bay under full sail was a big white
yacht. Men in white jeans and cotton sun-hats were run¬
ning along her spotless deck. As I caught sight of her she






came up into the wind. The sails fluttered and the main¬
sail crumpled as the gaff came down. The topsail, jib,
and staysail followed and the bubblin g water at her bow
subsided into a long, deep ripple. An anchor chain clattered.

An admiring group clustered at the end of the terrace.
There was Koche in swimming trunks, Mary Skelton, the
Vogels, the two English, the French couple, Schimler,
and a plump, squat woman in an overall whom I recog¬
nised as Madame Koche. Some of them had cameras in
their hands. I hurried over to them.

Koche was squinting through the sights of a cine
camera. Herr Vogel was feverishly winding a new film
into position. Mrs Clandon-Hartley was e xamining the
yacht through a pair of field-glasses slung round her
husband’s neck. Mademoiselle Martin was operating a
small box camera under her lover’s excited direction.
Schimler stood slightly apart, watching Koche work the
cine camera. He looked ill and tired.

‘Lovely, isn’t she?’

It was Mary Skelton.

‘Yes. I thought your brother was chasing that old
Frenchman up the path. I didn’t know what all the fuss
was about.’

‘He’s gone to fetch a camera.’

At this moment her brother appeared holding an ex¬
pensive Kodak. ‘All this boyish enthusiasm!’ he com¬
plained. ‘Why I should want to take pictures of somebody
else’s yacht, I do not know.’ Nevertheless, he took two
shots of the yacht.

In his wake, clutching an enormous filmpack reflex of
an ancient pattern, trotted Monsieur Duclos. Breathing
heavily, he unfolded the hood of the reflex and clambered
on to the parapet.


72



‘Do you think he works with his beard inside that
viewfinder or out?’murmured Skelton.

There was a loud clicking as Monsieur Duclos wound
up the shutter of the reflex, a moment’s silence, then a
soft crash as he released it. He scrambled off the parapet
with a satisfied air.

‘I bet he’s forgotten to put a plate in.’

‘You’ve lost,’ said the girl. ‘Let’s go back down.’

Major and Mrs Clandon-Hartley were leaning over the
parapet at the top of the steps. He nodded to me.

‘Nice little craft, that. British built, by the look of her.
Spent a leave yachting on the Norfolk Broads in ’17.
Grand sport. Got to have money to do it like this, though.
Ever go to the Broads?’

‘No.’

‘Grand sport. By the way, meant to introduce you to
my good lady. This is Mr Vadassy, my dear.’

She glanced at me impassively, indifferently; yet I
had the impression that she was weighing me. I
wished somehow that I had more clothes on. She smiled
slightly with one side of her mouth and nodded. I
bowed. I had an uncomfortable feeling that any form
of verbal greeting would be regarded as an imper¬
tinence.

‘We might have a game of Russian billiards later,’ put
in her husband breezily.

‘Delighted.’

‘Good. See you later.’

Mrs Clandon-Hartley nodded curtly.

It was a dismissal.

I found the Skeltons lying on the sand under a sun¬
shade at one comer of the beach. They made room for
me and I sat down.


73





The girl sighed happily. ‘Say, Mr Vadassy, did you
ever see anything like those Switzers?’

I followed her gaze. Herr Vogel had mounted his
camera on a long steel tripod. Blushing and gi ggling j n
front of the lens stood Frau Vogel. As I watched, Vogel
operated the delayed action shutter and skipped round
the tripod to strike a pose with his arm round his wife.
There was a faint whir from the camera, the shutter
clicked and the Vogels burst into roars of laughter. The
dear, dead friend was evidently forgotten.

Watching these antics with undisguised amusement
were the French couple and Koche. The latter glanced
across at us to see if we had been watching. He walked
over.

Skelton said: ‘Do you hire those two to entertain the
guests?’

He grinned. ‘I’m thinking of asking them to stay on as
a permanent attraction.’

‘I get it. Les Deux Switzers. Good, clean fun and a
laugh in every line. Straight from their New York success.
Swell dressers on and off.’

Koche looked slightly bewildered, and was about to
reply when the air was rent by a shrill call from the terrace
above.

‘Al-baire! ’

I looked up round the edge of the sunshade. Madame
Koche was leaning over the parapet, her hands cupped
round her mouth.

‘Al-baire!’

Koche did not look up.

‘The voice from the minaret,’ he remarked lightly,
‘calling the faithful to prayer.’ With a nod to me he started
towards the steps.


74


‘You know, 5 commented Skelton dreamily, ‘if I were
our Albert, I’d murder that old battle-axe.’

‘Tut-tut!’ murmured his sister, and to me: ‘How about
a swim, Mr Vadassy? ’

Both she and her brother were excellent swimmers.
By the time I had churned out fifty metres or so on my
ponderous side-stroke they were paddling round the an¬
chored yacht halfway across the bay. I swam slowly back
to the beach.

The Swiss were now in the water. At least, Herr Vogel
was in the water. Frau Vogel was lying on a rubber raft
quivering with laughter while her husband cavorted round
her, splashing furiously and yodelling at the top of his voice.

I went back to the sunshade and dried my hair on my
wrap. Then I lay down and lit a cigarette.

The camera situation was becoming clearer. Mentally
I sketched out the results of my observations.


Herr Vogel .

Frau Vogel . . .

Monsieur Duclos
Mr Skelton . . .
Miss Skelton . . .

Monsieur Roux . .

Mademoiselle Martin
Monsieur Koche . .

Madame Koche . .
Herr Schimier . .
Major Clandon-Hartley
Mrs Clandon-Hartley .


j- Voigtlander box-type
Obsolete reflex
Kodak Retina

Box-type (French)

Cine camera (Pathe)
None
None


I considered the last three names.


75









The two English were probably not the sort of people
who took photographs. Mrs Clandon-Hartley would prob¬
ably disapprove. As for Herr Schimler, I was beginning
to think that it was hardly worth while bothering to
collect more evidence against him. Still, Beghin had asked
for the information; he should have it. Koche? Well, we
would see. I rolled over on my stomach out of the shadow
of the sunshade. The sand was hot and the sun very
strong. I draped a towel over my head. By the time the
Skeltons, dripping and exhausted, rejoined me I was
asleep.

Young Skelton poked me in the ribs.

‘Time to eat,’ he said.

The essence of all good plans, I reminded myself as I
ate my lunch, was simplicity. My plan was simple, all
right.

One of twelve persons had my camera. I had an identi¬
cal camera belonging to that same one person. Beghin
had pointed out that when and if that person discovered
the loss of his or her photographs, he or she would be
anxious to recover them. Now, for all that person knew,
they were still in the camera. Therefore, if that person saw
an opportunity of re-exchanging the cameras, he or she
would certainly take it.

My idea was to plant the Contax I had in some con¬
spicuous place at a time when all the guests would have
an opportunity of seeing it, retreat somewhere whence I
could see the camera without being seen and wait for
results. If nothing happened it meant that the exchange
of cameras had not yet been discovered. In that case no
damage would be done. If something did happen, then I
would know beyond doubt the identity of the spy.

I had given much thought to the question of where to



set the trap. I had finally decided upon the chair in the
hall on which the original exchange had been made. It
was the logical spot and had the additional advantage of
being easy to watch. In the writing-room that opened off
the opposite side of the hall there was a small gilt-framed
mirr or., hanging from a hook in the wall and tilted slightly
forward. By manoeuvring one of the big armchairs in the
room I could sit with my back to the door and see the
hall chair in the mirror. It would be impossible to see me
from the hall except by stooping down to chair level and
looking through the writing-room door into the mirror.
Nobody, however cautious, was likely to do that.

I finished my lunch hurriedly, left the terrace for the
writing-room, and put the armchair in position. Then I
fetched the camera. A minute later I sat down breath¬
lessly to wait.

The other guests started to leave the terrace.

First came the Vogels. A longish interval followed.
Then Monsieur Duclos walked past, removing a crumb
from his beard as he went. There followed Roux and
Mademoiselle Martin, Major and Mrs Clandon-Hartley
and the Americans. Schimler came through last. I waited.
If there were going to be any exchanging done, my own
camera would have to be fetched first to replace the one
on the chair.

Ten minutes went by. The clock on the mantelpiece
chimed two. I stared at the mirror, trying not to blink
lest in the infini tesimal fraction of a second during
which my eyes were closed something happened. The
effort made my eyes water. Five past two. Once I thought
a shadow moved across the room as though something or
someone had passed by outside the window. But the sun
was on the other side of the house, so that I could not


77







say for certain. In any case, I was looking for something
more substantial than shadows. Ten past two.

I was beginning to get bored. I had relied too much
on theories. There had been too many ‘ifs’ in my reason¬
ing. My eyes were smarting with the strain. They began
to wander.

There was a slight creak from somewhere behind me.
I looked sharply in the mirror. There was nothing to
be seen.

Then suddenly I leapt from the chair and hurled my¬
self at the door. But I was not quick enough. My han d
just missed it as it swung to. It slammed. A key turned
quickly in the lock.

I tried the handle once, then looked round wildly.
There was the window. I dashed over, fumbled for a
second or two with the catch and flung it open. I
trampled frantically over a couple of flowerbeds to the
door of the hotel.

The hall was deserted and silent. The chair on which
I had left the camera was empty.

My trap had worked. But it had caught me. I had lost
the one piece of evidence that proved my own innocence.



7

I spent quite a long time in my room that afternoon
trying to persuade myself that the best thing I could do
would be to leave the Reserve, make my way across
country to Marseilles, and ship as a steward or deck¬
hand in an east-bound cargo liner.

I had the whole thing planned. I would take Koche’s
motorboat and land at some deserted spot west of St
Gatien. Then I would lock the rudder of the boat, start
the engine and leave it to chug out to sea while I made
off inland to Aubague. There I would catch a train for
Marseilles.

At this point doubts began to creep in. One was always
reading of young men running away to sea, of people ship¬
ping as deck-hands and working their passages. There
seemed to be no special qualifications needed. No ropes
had to be spliced. No rigging had to be climbed. All you
did was paint the anchor, chip rust off the deck plating
and say ‘aye, aye, sir,’ when addressed by an officer.
It was a tough life and you met tough men. There were
weevils in the ship’s biscuits and you had little to eat
but skilly. Quarrels were settled with bare fists and you
went about naked to the waist. But one of the crew al¬
ways had a concertina and there were sing-songs when the
day’s work was done. In after life you wrote a book
about it.

Yet would it work out quite like that for me? I was

79



inclined to think that it wouldn’t. I may be unlucky,
but I find that my enterprises never proceed along classical
lines.

Rust-chipping would probably prove to be a highly
skilled trade. They would laugh at the idea of a 1anrkma n
imagining that he could do it. There would be no vacancy.
Or if there were a vacancy it would be on a coastal steamer
bound for Toulon. Or there would be some strange per¬
mit that had to be obtained from the police three months
prior to sailing. Or they would find that my eyesight
wasn’t sufficiently good. Or they would insist on previous
experience. Reality is always so obstructive.

I smoked a cigarette and reconsidered my position.

One thing was clear. I must not let Beghin know that
I had lost the second camera. To do so would be to invite
immediate re-arrest. The Commissaire was out for con¬
victions. Without the evidence of the camera I would
stand no chance of proving my innocence before an
exa m in in g magistrate. What a fool I had been! Now it
was more than ever necessary that I should clear up the
mystery for myself. I must take risks. I must know for
certain that Schimler had the cameras. I must be in a posi¬
tion to convince Beghin. There was only one thing to
do. I would have to search the German’s room.

The idea scared me. If I were caught, a charge of thiev¬
ing would be added to my present troubles. But the
search had to be made. Besides, it was certain to be suc¬
cessful. Should I make it now? My heart beating a little
faster than usual, I looked at my watch. Nearly three
o dock. I would have to find out first exactly where
Schimler was at the moment. I must be cool and careful
about it. The phrase comforted me. Gool and careful. I
must keep my head. Soft shoes? Most necessary. A

80


revolver? Absurd! I didn’t have one, and even if I had ...
A torch? Idiot! it wasn’t dark. And then I remembered
that I didn’t even know the number of his room.

A wave of relief swept over me, and immediately I
despised myself for it. It was no good telling myself that,
whatever I felt, annoyance or relief, the fact remained
that I did not know Schimler’s room number. The point
was that an efficient person would have already found
out what it was. If this was the way I was protecting my
own interests—feeling relieved when difficulties arose—
then heaven help me.

It was in this frame of mind that I went down to the
terrace, I had hoped to find it empty. But it was not.
Sitting in a deck-chair at one end, smoking a pipe and
reading a book, was Herr Schimler.

Now, if I had but known the number of it, was the
time to search his room. I almost turned on my heel to
go back. But I stood where I was. I would have to let the
opportunity go. Still, there was no harm in engaging the
man in conversation, in finding out what sort of a person
I had to deal with. After all, one of the fundamentals of
good strategy was the study of your opponent’s mind.

But it was easier to think about studying Herr
Schimler s mind than actually to do so. I moved a wicker
armchair into the shade near him, sat down, and cleared
my throat.

He shifted the pipe between his teeth and turned over a
page of the book. He did not even glance in my direction.

I had heard that if one stares intently at the back of a
person’s head and wills that person to turn round, he will
very soon do so. I stared and willed at Herr Schimler for
a good ten minutes. I could still now make an anthro¬
pometric drawing of the back of his head. But I made no

81


F











impression at all on him. I managed to see the title of the
book. It was Nietzsche’s Birth of Tragedy, in German
and one of several German books I had seen on the shelves
in the writing-room. I abandoned the attempt to compete
with Nietzsche and gazed out to sea.

The sun was incredibly hot. A smoky haze lay on the
horizon. The air above the stone balustrade quivered in
the heat. In the garden the cicadas were in full chorus.

I watched a huge dragonfly circle once round a piece
of flowering creeper and soar off over the fir trees. It was
not an afternoon for thinking of spies. I ought, I knew,
to telephone to Beghin and give him tie list of cameras.
But he could wait. Perhaps later, when the day had grown
cooler, I would walk down to the post office. The detec¬
tive in his heavy black suit would be sweating in the
shadow of the dusty palm trees outside the gate and long¬
ing for a limonade gazeuse. I envied him. In exchange
for peace of mind, I would gladly wear black on hot
summer afternoons and sweat and wait and watch and long
for limonades gazeuses. A fine life that! Whereas mine
was furtive like that of a criminal. I was the watched.

I wondered what Mary Skelton thought of me. Nothing,
probably. Or if she did think anything it was, no doubt,
that I was a polite, reasonably personable young man
with a gift for languages that was useful. I remembered
the phrase she had used when she had thought that I
was out of earshot. ‘The nice gentleman.’ The intention
had been facetious in a kindly way. Quite appropriate
to a hotel acquaintance. It would be exceedingly pleasant
to have Mary Skelton interested in you. She understood
her brother perfectly. That was obvious. No less obvious
was the fact that he thought he understood her. You could
tell that by his manner towards her. But she ...


Herr Schimler shut his book with a snap and tapped
his pipe on the arm of his chair.

I plunged.

‘Nietzsche,’ I said, ‘is hardly the companion for a hot
afternoon.’

He turned his head slowly and examined me.

His thin cheeks had more colour in them now than on
the night before; but in his blue eyes there was no longer
misery. They expressed a more immediate emotion—
suspicion. I saw the muscles at the corner of his mouth
tighten.

He removed his pipe and started refilling it. His voice
when he spoke was casually deliberate.

‘You are probably right. But I was not seeking com¬
panionship.’

At any other time this rebuff would have reduced me
to miserable silence. Now I persevered.

‘Do people read Nietzsche nowadays?’

It was a fatuous question.

‘Why shouldn’t they?’

I blundered on.

‘Oh, I don’t know. I thought he was unfashionable.’

He took his pipe out of his mouth and looked at me
over his shoulder.

‘Do you know what you are talking about?’

I was tired of this.

‘Frankly, no. I merely wanted to talk.’

For a moment he glared at me; then his thin lips
relaxed into a smile. It was a very good smile and in¬
fectious. I smiled, too.

‘Years ago,’ I said, ‘a fellow student of mine used to
spend hours telling me why Nietzsche was a great man.
Personally, I foundered on Zarathustra.’

83








He put his pipe between his teeth, stretched himself,
and looked at the sky.

‘Your friend was wrong. Nietzsche might have been
a great man.’ He flicked the book lying on his knees with
his forefinger. ‘This is his earliest work and there are
seeds of greatness in it. Fancy diagnosing Socrates as a
decadent. Morality as a symptom of decadence! What a
conception. But what do you think he wrote about it about
twenty years later?’

I was silent.

‘He said that it smelt shockingly Hegelian. And he was
quite right. Identity is the definition only of a simple,
immediate, dead thing, but contradiction is the root of all
movement and vitality. Only in so far as a thing has in
itself contradiction does it move, does it possess an
impulse and activity.’ He shrugged. ‘But what the young
Nietzsche perceived with Hegel, the old Nietzsche despised.
The old Nietzsche went mad.’

I was having difficulty in following this. I said, rather
uneasily : ‘I haven’t seen you bathing.’

‘I do not bathe, but I will play you a game of Russian
billiards if you like. Or perhaps you call it bagatelle?’

It was said distastefully. He had the air of a man bow¬
ing ungraciously to the inevitable.

We went inside.

The billiard table was in one corner of the lounge.
We played in silence. In ten minutes he had beaten me
easily. As he made the winning stroke he straightened his
back and grinned.

‘That wasn’t very amusing for you,’ he said. ‘You’re
not very good at it, are you? Would you like another
game?’

I smiled. His manner was abrupt, almost brusque, but

84


there was something tremendously sympathetic about
him. I felt myself wanting to be friendly. I had almost
forgotten that this was Suspect Number One.

I said I would like another game. He turned the scor¬
ing dials back to zero, chalked his cue, and leaned forward
to make the first shot. The light from the window falling
on his face threw the rather wide cheekbones into relief,
modelled the tapering cheeks, put a highlight on to the
broad forehead. It was a beautiful head for a painter.
The hands, too, were good; large, but finely proportioned,
and firm and precise in their movements. His fingers
lightly grasping the cue moved it easily across the thumb
of his left hand. His eye was on the red ball when he
spoke.

‘You’ve had some trouble with the police, haven’t
you?’

It was said as casually as if he were asking the time.
The next moment there was a crash as three balls dropped
in quick succession.

I tried to be equally casual.

‘Good shot! Yes, there was a mistake over my pass¬
port.’

He moved round the table slightly to alter the alignment
of the balls.

‘Yugoslav, aren’t you?’

Only one ball dropped this time.

‘Hungarian.’

‘Oh, I see. Treaty of Trianon?’

‘Yes.’

His next shot knocked the pin over. He sighed.

‘I was afraid that would happen. Total score—zero.
Your shot. Tell me about Yugoslavia.’

I bent over the table. Two could play at this game.








‘I 'haven’t been near it for over ten years. You’re
German, aren’t you?’

I managed to hole the red in a low number.

‘Gpqdvshot! You’re improving.’ But he didn’t answer
my question. I tried again.

‘It’s unusual to meet Germans holiday-making abroad
these days.’

I potted the red again.

‘Splendid! You’re doing very well. What were you
saying?’

‘I said it was unusual to meet Germans on holiday
abroad these days.’

‘Yes? But that doesn’t worry me. I am from Basel.’

This was a direct lie. In my excitement I holed my
own ball without cannoning off another.

‘Bad luck! Where’s the chalk?’

I passed it to him in silence. He chalked his cue care¬
fully and started to play again. His score mounted
rapidly.

‘What’s that now?’ he murmured at last. ‘Sixty-four,
isn’t it?’

‘Yes.’

He bent over the table once more.

‘Do you know Germany well, Herr Vadassy?’

‘I’ve never been there.’

‘You should go. The people are so nice.’ The red ball
hovered on the brink of a high number. ‘Ah, not quite
enough energy behind that one. Sixty-four.’ He straight¬
ened his back. ‘Your German is very good, Herr Vadassy.
You might have lived there many years.’

‘At the University of Budapest we spoke mostly Ger¬
man. Besides, I teach languages.’

‘So? It is your shot.’



I played, but I played badly, for I could not keep my
thoughts on the game. Three times I knocked the pin
over. Once I missed the ball completely. Questions were
twisting and turning in my mind. What was this man
trying to get out of me? Those questions of his had not
been idle. What was the point of them? Did he suspect
me of taking the photographs intentionally? And mingled
with those unanswerable questions was the thought that
this man could not be a spy. There was something about
him that made the idea seem absurd. A certain dignity.
Besides, did spies quote Hegel? Did they read Nietzsche?
Well, his own answer would do there: ‘Why shouldn’t
they?’ What did it matter, anyway? One might just as
well ask: ‘Do spies make good husbands?’ Why shouldn’t
they? Why not, indeed?

‘Your shot, my friend.’

‘I’m sorry. I was thinking of something else.’

‘Oh!’ He smiled slightly. ‘This can’t be very enter¬
taining for you. Shall we stop?’

‘No, no. I had just thought of something I had for¬
gotten to do.’

‘Nothing important, I hope.’

‘No, nothing important.’

But it was important. I would telephone Beghin, throw
myself on his mercy, explain the loss of the camera, ask
for Schimler’s room to be searched as mine had been.
There was the excuse of the false name. But if only I
could get one concrete piece of evidence against him,
something that would establish his connection with the
ram era, something that would satisfy me that I was not
making a stupid mistake. Supposing I were to take a risk!
Supposing I were to ask point-blank if he had a camera?
After all, it could do no harm now. The person who had

87







slammed the writing-room door and taken the second
camera would have no doubts about my connection with
the business.

I holed two balls simultaneously.

‘I did not,’ I said, ‘expect that.’

‘No, I thought not.’

‘I am,’ I went on, as I moved round for the next shot,
‘a man of one hobby.’

I failed to score and he took his place at the table.

‘Indeed?’

‘Yes. It is photography.’

He squinted along his cue.

‘How nice.’

I watched him narrowly as I asked the fatal question.

‘Have you a camera?’

He stood up slowly and looked at me.

‘Herr Vadassy, do you mind not talking while I make
this shot? It is difficult. You see, I am going to hit the
cushion there, graze that white, hit the cushion again,
and send the red into maximum. The white should roll
into a five.’

‘I beg your pardon.’

‘It is I who should beg yours. This absurd game
interests me. It is an utterly antisocial device. It is like a
drug. It deprives you of the necessity for thinking. As soon
as you start to think, you play badly. Have I a camera?
I have no camera. I cannot, indeed, remember the last
time I held a camera in my hands. It should require no
thought on my part to produce that answer. Yet the
distraction is sufficient to break the spell. The shot would
have failed.’

He spoke solemnly. The fate of worlds might have de¬
pended on the success of the shot. Yet in his eyes, those


88


very expressive eyes, there was a gleam of mockery. I
thought I knew the reason for that gleam.

‘I can see,’ I remarked, ‘that I shall never be able to
play this game.’

But he had bent over the table again. There was a
pause, a soft click-click, and the sound of two balls
r umb lin g down to the tray.

‘Magnificent! ’ said a voice.

I turned round. It was Koche.

‘Magnificent,’ murmured Schimler, ‘but it is not war.
Herr Vadassy has been very patient with me. The game
has no attraction for him.’

I fancied that I saw the two exchange a significant
glance. What did Schimler mean by that pompous
threadbare allusion? I protested hastily that I had enjoyed
the game. Perhaps we could play again tomorrow.

Schimler assented without enthusiasm.

‘Herr Heinberger,’ said Koche jovially, ‘is an expert at
Russian billiards.’

But the atmosphere had changed in some curious way.
The two were obviously waiting impatiently for me to
go. I took my leave as gracefully as possible.

‘I had already noticed that. You will excuse me? I have
to go into the village.’

‘Of course.’

They stood and watched me go. They would not, it
was clear, utter a word until I was well out of earshot.

As I passed through the hall the Clandon-Hartleys were
going up the stairs. I murmured a greeting, but neither
replied. Then, something about them, something in their
stony silence, made me pause and glance after them. As
they turned at the top of the stairs I saw that she had a
handkerchief held to her face. Mrs Clandon-Hartley

89






crying? Impossible. That sort of Englishwoman didn’t
know how. She probably had something in her eye. I
walked on.

The detective waiting for me at the gate had been
changed. Now it was a short, stout man in a flat straw
hat who wandered after me down to the post office.

I got straight through to Beghin.

‘Well, Vadassy? You have the particulars of the
cameras?’

‘Yes. But the question of Schimler ...’

‘I have no time to waste. The cameras, please.’

I started to give him the list slowly so that he could
write it down. He snorted with impatience.

‘Hurry, please. We have not all day, and the call is
expensive.

Nettled, I rattled off the list as fast as I could. After
all, it was I who was paying for the call, not he. The man
was impossible. I concluded the list, fully expecting to
be asked to repeat it. But, no.

‘Good! And these three without cameras?’

‘I have questioned Schimler, that is, Heinberger. He
says he has no camera. I have had no opportunity to check
the English. They have, however, a pair of field-glasses.’

‘A pair of what?’

‘Field-glasses.’

‘That is unimportant. You will concern yourself only
with cameras. Have you anything else to report?’

I hesitated. Now was the time..

‘Hello, Vadassy. Are you still there?’

‘Yes.’

‘Then don’t waste time. Have you any thin g else
report?’

‘No.’


to


‘Very well. Telephone the Commissairc as usual to-
morrow morning.’ He hung up.

I walked back to the Reserve with a heart as heavy as
lead. I was a fool; a weak, cowardly fool.

The heat had made my shirt cling uncomfortably to
my body. I went to my room to change it.

The key was in the lock where I had left it, but the door
was not properly closed. As I touched the handle the latch
clicked and the door swung ajar. I went in and got my suit¬
case out from under the bed.

But for one thing I should probably have noticed
nothing unusual. That one thing was that it was my
habit to fasten only one latch of the case. Now both were
fastened.

I opened them and looked inside the case.

In the ordinary way I should have found nothing strange
in the sight of a slightly crumpled shirt. Now I stood up
quickly and went to the chest of drawers. Everything
there was in its place; but a small pile of handkerchiefs
in one corner of the top drawer caught my eye. I had only
one handkerchief with a coloured border. It had been at
the bottom of the pile. Now it was on the top. I looked
round the room. A corner of the counterpane on the
bed was caught up below the mattress. The chambermaid
had not left it like that.

There was no longer any doubt in my mind. The room
and my belongings had been searched.


91







8

To realise that one’s property has been searched is an
•unpleasant sensation.

My first reaction to the knowledge was anger. It was
monstrous that a stranger’s hands should open my suit¬
case, fumble among its contents, prying. But for the
latched suitcase I might never have known. Ah, that was
it! That was what was so infuriating. Not so much the
prying and the fumbling but the attempt at secrecy, the
fact that the fumbler thought that I would not know,
that careful fastening of both latches on the suitcase. In¬
efficiency! He should have noticed that I had only
fastened one latch. He should have noticed that I had left
the plain white handkerchiefs uppermost in the drawer.
Clumsy, fumbling oaf!

I went to the drawer and arranged the handkerchiefs
as I had left diem. I refastened the suitcase—one latch.
I straightened the counterpane on the bed. Then, feeling
a litde calmer, I sat down. There was only one person
who would search my room and take nothing from it—
the spy. Having retrieved his camera and found the film
missing he would naturally try my room. Naturally? Yes,
because he had seen me watching through the writing-
room mirror and would assume that since I was laying a
trap for him I had developed the film and discovered the
nature of his photographs. And then I remembered that
at the bottom of my suitcase I had left two undeveloped


92


rolls of film that I had used at Nice. I had not thought to
see if they were still there. I got out the suitcase again
and went through it very carefully. The rolls were gone.
The spy was evidently leaving nothing to chance. I would
do well to remember that in future.

If only I could have returned and caught him in the
act. I spent a pleasurable half minute contemplating the
scene. There would, I decided, have been very litde left
of the spy to hand over to Beghin. In my mind’s eye I
dragged the whimpering wretch to his feet and flung him
into the arms of the waiting agents.

It was with some surprise that I realised that this im¬
aginary spy of mine was not Schimler. It was not even
Koche. It was nobody at the Reserve. It was a vindictive
rat of a man with an evil face, a revolver in his hip
pocket, and a knife up his sleeve; a vicious, disgusting
creature without a single redeeming quality; a sly, furtive
wretch despised even by those who employed him.

Nothing, I thought bitterly, could have demonstrated
more clearly my utter futility. It was perfect! Instead of
trying to find out which of the twelve possible persons had
searched my room, I was busily evolving a fairy-tale
thirteenth. I deserved to fail.

‘Now,’ I said aloud; ‘get this into your head. This spy,
this man or woman who took those photographs and
your precious camera, this person who saw you through
the writing-room window and locked you in like the
helpless fool you are while he took the camera off the
chair, this person who came into this room looking among
your clothes for his photographs, this person is real, he is
alive, he is one of those people outside. He doesn’t look
like a spy, you nitwit. He hasn’t got a vicious look and
a revolver in his hip pocket. He’s real. He may have a


93






white beard like old Duclos or bulging eyes like Roux.
He may quote Hegel like Schimler or he may seem as
sleepy as Koche. She may look austere and dry like Mrs
Clandon-Hardey or young and attractive like Mary Skel¬
ton. She may laugh like Frau Vogel or yearn like
Mademoiselle Martin. He may be as fat as Herr Vogel,
as thin as Major Clandon-Hartley, or as brown as Warren
Skelton. He may be a patriot or a traitor, a crook or an
honest man, or a bit of each. He may be old or young.
She may be dark or fair, intelligent or stupid, rich or
poor. And, whoever it is, you incompetent ass, you’re not
doing yourself the slightest good sitting here.’

I got up and looked out of the window.

The Skeltons had just come up from the beach and
were sitting down at a table on the lower terrace. Faindy
I could hear their voices. Warren laughed once and struck
a Napoleonic attitude. His sister shook her head vehem-
endy. I wondered vaguely what they were talking about.
If they had been down on the beach all the afternoon they
might be able to give alibis to some of the other guests.
For the searching of my room could have taken place only
while I had been with Schimler or in the village tele¬
phoning Berghin. It had probably been the latter. I had,
no doubt, been seen leaving the hotel. The path to the
gate was visible from half the windows or from the writing-
room. Perhaps while I had been planning to search
Schimler’s room, Schimler had been pl anning to search
mine. A pretty irony. Schimler, however; had known the
number of my room. That is if it had been Schimler who
had latched my suitcase twice instead of once. Perhaps
his mind had been busy with the Birth of Tragedy at
the time. Perhaps Koche had made the search, or Hen
Vogel or Monsieur Duclos or ...


94



But this was Friday. Only one day more and it would
be for me to go; and still I should be hoping, wonder¬
ing, saying names to myself—‘Koche, Schimler, Herr
Vogel, Monsieur Duclos’—and still I should be here
watching the hands of the clock move and doing nothing
but wish. I must act. I must do something. I must hurry.

When I left my room I was very careful to lock the
door and put the key in my pocket. Worry can play very
neat tricks with the sense of humour.

I walked slowly down to the lower terrace. The Skel¬
tons were still talking, but as I approached they looked
up. They hailed me with unexpected eagerness.

‘We’ve been looking for you.’ He came towards me,
took me by the arm and looked at me searchingly. ‘Have
you heard yet?’

‘Heard what?’

He led me firmly towards their table.

‘He hasn’t heard,’ he announced with satisfaction.

‘Not heard?’ echoed the girl. She rose and took my
other arm. ‘Sit down, Mr Vadassy, and listen.’

‘The sensation of the week!’ put in her brother.

‘It’s too good to be true.’

‘Will you tell him or shall I?’

‘You. I’ll take the big scenes.’

Skelton suddenly pushed me into a chair and thrust
a packet of cigarettes under my nose.

‘Smoking steadies the nerves.’

‘But what ...?’

‘A match?’

I lit the cigarette.

‘You see,’ put in the girl earnestly, ‘we don’t want you
to think us completely crazy, but we have this afternoon
witnessed such a sight as ...’







‘Will kill you,’ supplied her brother. ‘Moreover, we’ve
been dying to tell someone about it. Thanks to you, Mr
Vadassy, we live.’

I grinned sheepishly. I was beginning to feel a little
embarrassed.

‘One of us,’ remarked the girl darkly, ‘won’t live much
longer if you don’t get on with it.’

‘To business, then!’ he announced. ‘Mr Vadassy, you
know that yacht that came in this morning?’

‘Yes.’

‘It’s an Italian.’

‘Is it?’

‘It is. Well, we were down on the beach this afternoon
with some of the others. There were the Switzers and
the French couple and that old guy with the white beard.
A bit later down come the British major and his wife.’

‘Oh, hurry up! ’ said the girl.

‘Wait! I want to recreate the atmosphere for Mr
Vadassy. That’s how it happened. They came down a
while after everyone else. You know how hot it was. All
of us were lying around half asleep in our chairs after
that poulet a la creme they gave us at lunch. We just
knew the British had come down because we’d heard
him saying his chair was unsafe or something.’

‘You see,’ she broke in, ‘they were sitting just a little
to the right, so we were quite close and saw everything,
Well...’

‘Be quiet,’ said her brother, ‘you’re spoiling it. Your
part comes in a minute. As I was saying, Mr Vadassy,
we were all sirring there wondering whether it was pos¬
sible for the sun to get much warmer and whether we
hadn’t had too much to eat when Mrs Switzer says some¬
thing to Mr Switzer. Well, you know how it is. Even

96









if you don’t know a language, you can often understand
the intonation. So I open my eyes and see that the
Switzers are looking out across the bay. Then I see that
the yacht has lowered a dinghy and that a sailor is
rowing it around to the gangway. Down the gangway
comes a man in a yachting cap and white drill. He’s got
plenty of flesh on him, but he hops into the dinghy
neady enough and the sailor starts to row him towards
the beach. Well, everybody perks up at this, probably
because it takes their minds off the digesting of the poulet
a la creme and starts talking.’ He wagged a dramatic
finger. ‘Litde do they know what is in store for them.’

‘But for us,’ interjected his sister, ‘the plot is already
thickening, for suddenly the two British start talking. The
queer thing is that they’re talking Italian. Queerer still,
it’s Mrs Clandon-Hartley who is doing most of the talk¬
ing. What’s more, she keeps pointing to the dinghy. Then
the Major has a look and starts talking back. He doesn’t
seem to agree with what she’s saying, for he shakes his
head and says something that sounded like a girl’s name,
Kay something or other. She didn’t seem to like it and
started pointing again. But this time the dinghy is about
twelve yards out and the man in the cap is standing up with
a boat-hook to catch that iron ring on the rocks when sud¬
denly she lets out a sort of whoop and runs down to the
water’s edge calling out something and waving to him.’

‘The man with the boat-hook saw her at the same
moment and nearly fell overboard with excitement,’ said
Warren Skelton; ‘then he shouted, “Maria!” I don’t
understand a word of Italian, so I couldn’t tell what they
were talking about, but they were talking away as hard
as they could go across the water until finally he got the
dinghy alongside the landing rock and jumped ashore.’

97

G








‘Then,’ said the girl, ‘he flung his arms round her
and kissed her two or three times. They evidently knew
each other very well indeed. Not that I would care to
be kissed even once by this particular man. He was fattish,
and when he took his cap off he had his hair cropped
so that his head looked like a dirty grey egg. Also he had
dewlaps, and if there’s one thing I wish no part of it’s a
man with dewlaps. But what surprised me was her. We’d
never heard her say a single word before, and here she
was behaving like a teenager and grinning till we thought
her face was going to crack. Obviously she hadn’t expected
Signor Dewlaps and it was all a beautiful surprise. He
was pointing to the yacht and thumping himself on the
chest as though to say, “Look what I’ve done,” and she
was pointing up at the hotel and telling him she was
staying there. Then they started hugging and kissing
again. Everyone on the beach was highly diverted.’

‘That is,’ qualified Skelton, ‘all except the Major. He
wasn’t looking a bit pleased. In fact, he was looking pretty
tight-lipped. When this second bout of hugging started
he got up very slowly from his chair and walked over to
them. He just walked, but there was something about
the way he walked that made you feel that something was
going to happen. The Switzers had started talking to the
old Frenchman, but now they shut up. If it hadn’t been
for the sound of the sea you could have heard a pin drop
on the sand. But nothing happened—then. Signor Dew¬
laps looked up and saw the Major and grinned at him.
You could see they’d met before, but you could also see
that they thought nothing at all of each other. They
shook hands and Dewlaps went on grinning, but Mrs
Major dried up again as though someone had put an ex¬
tinguisher on her. Then they all started to talk quietly.

98





Well, I fhinfe most of the others lost interest at that
point, but I kept on watching them. You see, I’m some¬
thing of a student of human nature.’

‘For goodness’ sake,’ interrupted his sister, ‘get on with
it. What he’s trying to say, Mr Vadassy, is that they all
looked as if they were saying everything except the one
thing they wanted to say.’

‘That was,’ Skelton cut in, ‘until somebody did say it.
But we had to wait for that. I must admit that I was
beginning to lose interest myself when suddenly they, at
least the two men, began to raise their voices. You know
how Italian sounds from a distance—like a car with plug
trouble. Well, suddenly, somebody stepped on the gas.
Dewlaps was jabbering away furiously and waving his
hand in the Major’s face. The Major had gone very white.
Then Dewlaps stopped and half turned away as though
he had finished. But just then he evidently thought of
a really dirty crack because he turned back, said something
and then put back his head and roared with laughter.

‘The next moment I saw the Major bunch his fist and
draw back his arm. Somebody yelped—that French girl,
I think—then the Major let fly and caught Signor Dew¬
laps— thwack ! —smack in the solar plexus. You ought to
have seen it. Dewlaps stopped laughing with his mouth
still open, made a noise like bath water running away,
staggered back a pace and sat down —squoosh !—on the
sand just as a spent wave was running across it. Mrs
Clandon-Hartley let out a scream, then turned on the
Major and started yelling at him in Italian. And he began
to cough, of all things. He couldn’t seem to stop. Of
course, by this time everybody, including us, had rushed
over. The sailor who had been sitting in the boat hopped
out and splashed over to help the young Frenchman with

99





Dewlaps, while the Switzer and I fastened on to the
Major. Mrs Switzer and the French girl and Mary sur¬
rounded Mrs Clandon-Hartley. The old boy with the
beard just hopped round saying what a pity it was. Not
that there was much for us to do, because the Major
couldn’t do anything but cough and gasp “swine!” and
Mrs Clandon-Hartley had started crying and saying in
broken English that she was very sorry, and that her
husband was a mad wolf. He didn’t look much like it to
me. Dewlaps shook his fist and shouted a lot of Italian
when he had the breath and trailed off in his wet pants
to the dinghy. The Major finally got over his coughing
and they both became dignified and went upstairs. Now,
aren’t you sorry you missed it?’

‘You could have told us what it was all about,’ said
the girl wistfully.

But I was not thinking very much about what they
were saying. I leaned forward anxiously.

‘What time did all this happen?’

They both looked rather crestfallen. It must have
seemed to them that I was not doing justice to the story.

‘Oh, I don’t know,’ said Skelton impatiently; ‘about half
past three, I guess. Why?’

‘And did- anyone stay down on the beach the whole
afternoon?’

He shrugged a trifle irritably.

‘I wouldn’t know. There was a lot of coming and
going. After all the excitement had blown over a bit, one
or two went up to change into swim suits.’

‘I think Philo Vance has got a clue,’ said the girl. ‘Come
on, Mr Vadassy, tell us what’s on your mind.’

‘Oh, nothing,’ I said feebly. ‘I just saw Major and Mrs
Clandon-Hartley going upstairs as I went down to the


100






village. She had a handkerchief to her eyes. She must
just have been crying.’

‘Well, well, well! And I was afraid that you had the
whole thing explained. Thank goodness you haven’t, be¬
cause I’ve worked out a beautiful explanation.’

‘We’ve worked out a beautiful explanation,’ supple¬
mented her brother.

‘All right— we. You see, Mr Vadassy, we think that
many years ago Mrs Clandon-Hartley was just a simple
southern Italian peasant girl living in a simple southern
Italian village—you know, all baroque and whitewash and
no main drainage—with her parents. She is promised to
old Dewlaps, young and handsome then, the son of an¬
other brace of peasants. Then to the village comes the
bold, bad Major twirling his moustachios. Stop me if
you’ve heard this one. What happens? The Major, with
his slick city ways and his custom-made suits, dazzles the
simple peasant girl. To make a long story short, he
carries her off to the big city and marries her. ^

‘Hey!’ said Skelton, ‘that bit about marrying her wasn’t

in the script.’

‘Well, he does marry her. Maybe she’s not so simple
after all.’

‘All right. Let it go.’ . . ,

‘The years roll by.’ She smiled at us triumphantly.
‘Meanwhile the young Dewlaps, embittered and disil¬
lusioned—that accounts for his face looking the way it
does—has worked and prospered. Starting right from the
bottom and working up and up and up, he is now one
of the biggest shysters in Italy.’

‘It seems to me,’ put in her collaborator, that this
story ends all wrong. It ought to be Dewlaps who does
the socking and the Major who gets his pants wet.’


ioi







The girl looked thoughtful.

‘Maybe.’ She looked at me. ‘I guess you must think
we’re being mean over this. But, you see, the whole thing
was so unnerving really that we should be feeling de¬
pressed if we didn’t laugh about it.’

I did not know quite what to say.

‘I see,’ I mumbled, ‘that the yacht has gone.’

‘Yes, it went about an hour ago,’ said Skelton gloomily.

At this moment the Vogels appeared at the top of the
steps. There was a subdued air about them. They paused
at our table.

‘The young people have been telling you of this after¬
noon’s affair?’ he said to me in German.

‘Yes, I have heard something of it.’

‘An unfortunate business,’ he said gravely. ‘My wife
gave Frau Clandon-Hartley some smelling salts, but I do
not think they will help much. Poor man. His wife says
fhat he was wounded in the war and that it has affected
his brain. He is not, it seems, responsible for his actions.
The man from the yacht had, it appears, landed to pur¬
chase some wine from Koche’s cellar and beg some ice.
Frau Clandon-Hartley recognised in him an old friend.
That was all. The poor Major misunderstood.’

They went on up to the hotel.

‘What did he say?’ said Skelton curiously.

‘He said that, according to Mrs Clandon-Hardey, the
Major was badly wounded in the war and that he’s not
quite right in the head.’

They were silent for a moment. Then I saw the girl’s
forehead pucker thoughtfully.

‘You know,’ she said to neither of us in particular. ‘I
don’t think that that can be true.’

Her brother snorted impatiendy.



‘Well, let’s forget it, anyhow. What are you drinking,
Mr Vadassy? Dubonnet sec ? Good. That makes three.
I’ll toss you who goes up to get them.’

I lost.

As I went up to order the drinks I saw Monsieur
Duclos diking excitedly to Koche. He was demonstrating
a fierce uppercut to the jaw.








The Clandon-Hartleys did not come down to dinner.

I was interested in them in spite of myself. So Mrs
Clandon-Hardey was an Italian! That explained a lot. It
explained the Major’s use of the word ‘ apperitivo ’ when
he had been talking to me the night previously. It ex¬
plained his wife’s forbidding silence. She was shy of
speaking broken English. It explained why ‘my good
lady’ was a ‘bit religious.’ It explained her un-English
appearance. And Clandon-Hardey himself was a shell¬
shock case not responsible for his actions. I remembered
Mary Skelton’s doubt of that. Well, if their account of the
incident on the beach were accurate. I was inclined to
doubt it too. It sounded as if there had been more to
the affair than a mere neurotic outburst. But it was
no affair of min e. I had more important things to think
about. This wretched business of the Clandon-Hartleys
had rendered the Skeltons useless from my point of
view. There had been ‘a lot of coming and going.’ That
presumably had taken place while I was in the village. It
was hopeless.

D inner was nearly over when Koche came on to the
terrace and announced that a ping-pong table had been
erected under the trees in the garden and that guests
were invited to make use of it. By the time I had finished
my dinner I could hear that the invitation had been
accepted. I wandered towards the sound.




"£9„Y] S


An electric light fixed in the branches above the green-
topped table shed a hard light on the faces of the players.
They were Skelton and the Frenchman, Roux. Sitting
on a stone rockery watching them were Mademoiselle
Martin and Mary Skelton.

Roux played crouching in an attitude of fierce concen¬
tration, his protuberant eyes watching the ball as if it
were a bomb on the point of exploding. He leaped about
a great deal. In contrast, Skelton’s easy, lazy play looked
wooden and ineffective. But I noticed that he seemed to
gain most of the points. Mademoiselle Martin made no
effort to disguise her chagrin at this, uttering loud cries
of despair every time Skelton won. A Roux victory was
received with corresponding jubilation. I saw that Mary
Skelton was watching her with interest and amusement.

The game ended. Mademoiselle Martin cast a male¬
volent glance at Skelton and wiped her perspiring lover’s
forehead with his handkerchief. I heard her assuring him
that his failure made no difference to her affection for him.
‘What about a game?’ said Skelton to me.

Before I could reply, however, Roux had bounded to
; the other end of the table, flourishing his bat, and an¬
nounced with a flashing smile that he wanted his revenge.

. ‘What does he say?’ muttered Skelton.

Y ‘He says he wants his revenge.’

~ ‘Oh, all right.’ He winked. ‘I’d better see that he has it.’
- They started to play again. I sat down beside Mary
L, Skelton.

I ‘Why is it,’ she said, ‘that I can’t understand a word
o of what that Frenchman says? He seems to have a very
peculiar accent.’

‘He’s probably a provincial. Even Parisians can’t under¬
stand some provincial French.’






‘Well, that’s comforting. You know, I think that if he
goes on playing much longer his eyes will drop right out.’

I forget what I replied, for I was trying, for my own
satisfaction, to identify Roux’s accent. I had heard an¬
other like it, and quite recently. I knew it as well as I
knew my own name. A loud cry of delight from Madem¬
oiselle Martin brought my thoughts back to the game.

‘Warren can be a very convincing loser when he likes,’
said the girl. ‘He lets me win a game sometimes, and I
always feel that it’s my good play.’

He was convincing enough to lose by a very narrow
margin of points, though not without having to referee
a spirited argument between Roux and Monsieur Duclos,
who had arrived on the scene halfway through the game
and insisted on keeping the score. Mademoiselle Martin
was triumphant, and kissed Roux on the lobe of the ear.

‘You know,’ murmured Skelton, ‘that old so-and-so
with the white beard is a menace. I’ve seen him cheating
at Russian billiards, but I didn’t think he’d try and cook
other people’s ping-pong scores. I was keeping count my¬
self. I was five points down, not two. If we’d gone on
any longer he’d have won the game for me. Maybe he’s
got some sort of inverted kleptomania.’

‘And where,’ the subject of his comment was demand¬
ing sportively, ‘are the English major and his wife this
evening? Why are they not playing ping-tennis? The
Major would be a formidable opponent.’

‘Silly old slob!’said Mary Skelton.

Monsieur Duclos beamed at her blankly.

‘For goodness’ sake shut up,’ said her brother; ‘they
might understand you.’

Mademoiselle Martin, dimly comprehending that Eng¬
lish was being spoken, said ‘Okay’ and ‘How do you do?’




to Roux, dissolved into laughter, and was rewarded with
a kiss on the nape. It was evident that nobody had under¬
stood. Monsieur Duclos buttonholed me and began to
discuss the affair on the beach.

‘One would not have thought,’ he said, ‘that in this
cold militar y officer there was so much passion, so much
love for this Italian woman, his wife. But the English are
like that. On the surface, cold and businesslike. With the
En glish it is always business, one thinks. But below, who
knows what fires may slumber!’ He frowned. ‘I have seen
much of life, but one can never understand the English
and the Americans. They are inscrutable.’ He stroked
his beard. ‘It was a beautiful blow, and the curious noise
made by the Italian was very satisfactory. Straight to the
chin. The Italian fell like a stone.’

‘I heard that the blow was in the stomach.’

He looked at me sharply. ‘And to the chin, Monsieur.
And to the chin. Two magnificent blows!’

Roux, who had been listening, intervened.

‘There was no blow struck,’ he said decidedly. ‘The
F. nglkh major used jiu-jitsu. I was watching closely. 1
am myself familiar with the hold.’

Monsieur Duclos put his pince-nez on his nose and
glowered.

K ‘There was a blow to the chin. Monsieur,’ he said
sternly.

Roux threw up his hands. His eyes bulged. He
scowled.

‘You could not have seen,’ he said rudely. He turned
to Mademoiselle Martin. ‘You saw, ma petite, did you
not? Your eyesight is perfect. You have no glasses to
confuse you like this old gentleman here. It was un-
- doubtedly jiu-jitsu, was it not?’


107




‘Oui, cheri. 1

‘There, you see! ’ jeered Roux.

‘A blow to the chin, without a doubt.’ Monsieur
Duclos’s pince-nez were quivering with anger.

‘Bah!’ said Roux savagely. ‘Look!’

He turned to me suddenly, grasped my left wrist, and
pulled. Instinctively I drew back. The next moment I
felt myself falling. Roux grasped my other arm and held
me up. There was amazing strength in his grip. I felt
his thin , wiry body stiffen. Then I was standing on
my feet again.

‘You see!’ he crowed. ‘It was jiu-jitsu. It is a simple
hold. I could have treated this Monsieur here as the
English major treated the man from the yacht.’

Monsieur Duclos drew himself up and bowed curtly.

‘An interesting demonstration, Monsieur. But unneces¬
sary. I can see perfectly well. It was a blow to the chin.’

He bowed again and strode off towards the hotel. Roux
laughed derisively after him and snapped his fingers.

‘An old cretin, that one,’ he said contemptuously. ‘Be¬
cause we pretend not to notice when he cheats, he thinks
we see nothing.’

I smiled noncommittally. Mademoiselle Martin began
to compliment him on his handling of the situation. The
two Skeltons had begun a game of ping-pong. I wandered
down to the lower terrace.

Beyond the inky darkness of the trees I could see two
silent figures leaning against the parapet. It was the Major
and his wife. As my footsteps grated on the path he
turned his head. I heard him say something softly to her,
then the two of them moved away. For a moment or
two I stood listening to their footsteps dying away up the
path, and was about to move to where they had been

108




standing when I saw the glow of a pipe in the blackness
near the trees. I went towards it.

‘Good evening, Herr Heinberger.’

‘Good evening.’

‘Would you care for a game of Russian billiards?’

There was a shower of sparks as he tapped the pipe
on the side of the chair.

‘No, thank you.’

For some unaccountable reason my heart began to beat
faster. Words and phrases were rising to my lips. I had
an overw helming desire to blurt out my suspicions of
him there and then, denounce him, this man here sitting
in the darkness, this invisible spy. ‘Thief! Spy!’ I wanted
to shout the words at him. I felt myself trembling. 1
opened my mouth and my lips moved. Then, suddenly,
a match spluttered and flared, and I saw his face, thin
and drawn in the yellow light, curiously dramatic.

He raised the match to the bowl of his pipe and drew
the flame into it. The match flamed twice and went out.
The glowing bowl moved in a gesture.

‘Why not sit down, Herr Vadassy? There is a chair
there.’

And, indeed, I was standing gaping at him like a fool.
I sat down, feeling as if I had only just escaped being
run over by a fast car, and that it was the driver’s skill
rather than my own agility that had saved me. For sheer
want- of something to say I asked him if he had
heard about the English couple and the incident on the
beach.

‘Yes, I have heard of it.’ He paused. ‘It is said that the
F.n g lishman is unbalanced.’

‘Do you think that is true?’

‘Not necessarily. The real question is just how far he





was provoked. Even a lunatic does not become violent
unless be is stimulated.’ Again he paused. ‘Violence,’ he
went on, ‘is a very odd thing. A normal man’s mind has
an extraordinarily complex mechanism inhibiting him
from using it. But the power of that mechanism varies
with different cultures. With the Western peoples it is less
powerful than with the Eastern. I do not, of course, speak
of war. There, different factors are operating. The Indian
is a good example of what I mean. The number of at¬
tempted assassinations of English officials in British India
is, not unnaturally, very high. The interesting thing is the
very large number of those attempts that fail. Most of
them fail not because Indians are specially bad shots, but
because at the crucial moment the would-be assassin be¬
comes immobilised by his instinct against violence. I once
talked with a Bengali Communist about it. He said that
the Hindu might go with hate in his heart and a good
revolver to kill the local representative of his oppressors.
He might escape detection, he might stand out of the
crowd unobserved when the time came and his enemy
approached and raise the revolver. The official would be
at his mercy. Then the Indian would hesitate. He would
see not the hated oppressor, but a man. His aim would
falter and the next moment he would himself be shot
down by the guards. A German or a Frenchman or an
Englishman under the same hate-stimulus would have shot
and shot straight.’

‘And what sort of hate-stimulus do you think caused
Major Clandon-Hartley to punch this Italian in the
stomach?’

‘Perhaps,’ said he, with a touch of impatience, ‘he did
not like the man.’ He rose to his feet. ‘I have some urgent
letters to write. You will excuse me?’


no



He went. For a time I remained seated in my chair,
thinking. It was not of Major Clandon-Hartley that 1
thought, but of Herr Schimler’s Indian. ‘He would see
not the hated oppressor, but a man.’ I felt a bond of
sympathy with that Indian. But that was not all, for ‘the
next moment he would himself be shot down by the
guards.’ There was the whole thing in a nutshell. Fear
and be slain. Or were you slain anyway, whether you were
afraid or not? Yes, you were. Good did not triumph. Evil
did not triumph. The two resolved, destroyed each
other, and created new evils, new goods that slew each
other in their turn. The essential contradiction. ‘Contra¬
diction is the root of all movement and vitality.’ Ah, that
was Schimler’s sentence. I frowned in the darkness. If I
paid a little more attention to Herr Schimler’s actions
and less to what he said I should perhaps get somewhere.

I walked up to the house. The writing-room was
empty. So much for Schimler’s ‘urgent letters’! As 1
walked through the lounge I passed Madame Koche
carrying a pile of linen. I said: ‘Good evening!’

‘Good evening, Monsieur. You have seen my hus¬
band? No? He will be down playing ping-tennis without
a doubt. There are the clever ones who pass their days
agreeably and the fools who slave behind the scenes. But
someone must do the work. At the Reserve it is left to
the women.’ She swept on up the stairs calling shrilly for
‘Marie.’

I passed through the deserted lounge to the upper
terrace.

Monsieur Duclos was sitting with a Pernod and a cigar
at a table by the balustrade. He saw me, stood up, and
bowed.

‘Ah, Monsieur! I must apologise for leaving you all


m









so abruptly. It was impossible, however, to remain there
to be insulted.’

‘I understand and sympathise, Monsieur.’

He bowed again. ‘You will take something to drink,
Monsieur? I have here a Pernod.’

‘Thank you, a vermouth-citron for me.’

He rang for the waiter and offered me a cigar, which I
accepted.

‘In spite of my years,’ he said, pouring some water into
his glass, ‘I am a proud man. Very proud.’ He paused to
take another piece of ice. I did not quite see why pride
should diminish with age, but, fortunately, he went on
before I could say so. ‘In spite of my years,’ he repeated,
‘I would have struck this Roux, but for one thing . There
were women present.’

‘You took the most dignified course possible,’ I assured
him.

He stroked his beard. ‘I am glad you think so. Mon¬
sieur. But it is difficult for a proud man to curb his anger
under such circumstances. When I was a student I fought
a duel. The man disputed my word. I struck him . He
challenged. We fought. Our friends arranged it.’

He sighed reminiscently. ‘It was a cold November morn¬
ing; so cold that my hands were blue and numb. It is
strange how such trifles worry a man. We took a carriage
to the meeting-place. My friend wished to walk, for
neither of us could afford a carriage. But I insisted. If
I were to be killed it would not matter. If I were not
killed the relief would be so great that I should not care
about the expense. So we took a carriage. But all the same
I was worrying about my cold hands. I put them in my
pockets and still they were cold. I was afraid to put them
under my arms for fear that my friend should think from


112


my hunched attitude that I was frightened. I tried sitting
on them, but the leather of the seats was smooth and
shiny and even colder. All my thoughts were centred in
my hands. And do you know why?’

I shook my head. His eyes twinkled behind the pince-
nez.

‘Because, in the first place, I was afraid that I should
not be able to shoot straight enough to hit my opponent
and, secondly, because if his hands were as cold as mine
he might have the luck to hit me.’

I smiled. ‘I take it, Monsieur, that all went well, after
all.’

‘Perfecdy! We both missed. We not only missed. We
nearly shot our seconds.’ He chuckled. ‘We have laughed
over it many times since. He is now the owner of the
factory next to min e. He has five hundred workmen. I
have seven hundred and thirty. He makes machinery.
I makp packing-cases.’ The waiter arrived. ‘A vermouth-
citron for Monsieur.’

I was puzzled. Someone, Skelton or the Major, had
told me that Monsieur Duclos had a canning factory. I
must have been mistaken.

‘Times are difficult,’ he was saying. ‘Wages rise, prices
rise. The next moment prices fall, yet wages still must
rise. I am forced to reduce wages. What happens? My
workmen strike. Some of them have been with me for
many years. I know them by their names, and as I walk
through the factory I greet them. Then the agitators, the
Communists, went among them, turning them against me.
My men struck. What did I do?’

The waiter arriving with my drink absolved me from
the necessity of replying.

‘What did I do? I sat down to think. Why had my men









turned against me? Why? The answer was—ignorance.

Poor fellows, they did not understand, they did not know.

I resolved to call them together, to explain to them the
simple truth. I, Papa Duclos, would explain. It needed
courage, for the young men did not know me as well
as the old ones and the agitators had done their work 1
well.’

Monsieur Duclos sipped at his Pernod.

‘I faced them,’ he said dramatically, ‘standing on the
steps of the factory. I held up my hand for silence. They
were silent. “My children,” I said, “you wish for increased
wages.” They cheered. I held up my hand again for
silence. I spoke again. “Let me tell you, my children,
what will happen if I do this. Then you may make
your own choice.” They murmured and were silent again. f
I felt inspired. “Prices are falling,” I continued. “Prices j
are falling. If I increase your wages the prices of the
Duclos works will be higher than those of our competitors.

We shall lose orders. For many of you there will no
longer be work. Do you wish that?” There were shouts
of “no!” Some agitators cried in their ignorant way that
the profits must be reduced. But how can one explain
to such imbeciles that interest must be paid on invest¬
ments, that if there were no profits business would come
to a stop? I ignored these shouts. I went on to tell them '•
of my love for them, of my sense of responsibility for
their welfare, of how I wished to do the best for all, of
how we must co-operate for the sake of ourselves and of
France. “We must all,” I said, “make sacrifices for the
common good.” I appealed to them to accept a reduction
in wages with stout hearts and the deter mina tion to
work even harder. When I had finished they cheered me,
and the older men agreed among themselves that all




should go back to work. It was a great moment. I wept
for joy.’ His eyes glistened through the pince-nez.

‘A great moment, as you say,’ I said tactfully. ‘But is
it, do you think , quite as simple as that? If wages fall,
do not prices fall still further for the reason that people
have less to spend?’

He shrugged.

‘There are,’ he said vaguely, ‘certain economic laws
with which it is unwise for man to tamper. If wages rise
above their natural level the delicate balance of the system
is upset. But I must not bore you with these affairs. In
my factory I am a businessman, alert, decisive, strong.
Now I am on holiday. For the moment my great respon¬
sibilities are put aside. I am content to soothe my tired
brain with contemplation of the stars.’

He flung his head back and looked at the stars. ‘Beau¬
tiful!’ he murmured raptly. ‘Magnificent! Such quanti¬
ties! Formidable!’

He looked at me again. ‘I am very sensitive to beauty,’
he said. He turned his attention to his glass, diluted the
contents with some more water and drank it off. Then
he looked at his watch and stood up.

‘Monsieur,’ he said, ‘it is half past ten. I am old. I have
enjoyed our discussion. Now, with your permission, I will
retire to bed. Good night.’

He bowed, shook hands, put his pince-nez in his
pocket, and walked, rather unsteadily, indoors. Only ihen
did it occur to me to suspect that perhaps Monsieur
Duclos had had more then one Pernod that evening.

For a time I sat in the lounge and read a fortnight-
old Gringoire. Then, tiring of this, I went out into the
garden to look for the Americans.

The ping-pong table was deserted, but the light was










still glaring down on it. The bats lay crossed, with a
dented ball lying between the handles. I picked up the
ball and bounced it on the table. It made an odd, cracked
sound. As I replaced it between the bats I heard a step
somewhere near at hand. I turned round expecting to see
someone. The darkness beyond the pool of light round
the table was intense. If there was anyone there I could
not see him or her. I listened, but there was no further
sound. Whoever it was must have passed by. I decided
to go down to the alcove on the lower terrace.

I threaded my way through the bushes to the path and
began to descend. I had nearly reached the steps and
could see a narrow strip of starry blue-black sky between
the cypresses when it happened.

There was a slight rustle in the bushes on my left. I
went to turn. The next moment something hit me on the
back of the head.

I don’t think that I actually lost consciousness, but the
next thing I realised at all coherently was that I was lying
on my face, half off the path, and that something was
p inning my shoulders to the ground with considerable
force. Lights were flashing behind my eyes and my ears
were singing; but behind the singing I could hear the
sound of somebody’s quick breathing, and I could feel
hands fumbling in my pockets.

Almost before my stunned brain had begun to absorb
these faces the whole thing was over. The pressure on
my shoulders suddenly relaxed, a shoe grated on the path,
then there was silence.

For several minutes I lay where I was, my hands
clasping my head as waves of sickening pain began to surge
through it. Then, as the waves subsided into a steady
throb, I got slowly to my feet and struck a match. My

116






note-case was lying open on the ground. It contained
only money and a few odd papers. Nothing had been
taken.

I started to walk towards the house. Twice I became
dizzy and had to stop and wait for the fit to pass, but I
gained my room without assistance and without meeting
anyone. I sank on the bed with a sigh. The relief of being
able to rest my head on a soft pillow was almost painful.

It may have been delayed concussion or it may have
been sheer weariness, but in less than a minute I seemed
to go to sleep. The inconsequence of my last conscious
thought makes me think that it must have been con¬
cussion.

‘I must remember,’ I kept saying to myself, ‘to tell
Beghin that Mrs Clandon-Hartley is an Italian.’








10


Looking back on those next twenty-four hours is, I find,
like looking at a stage through the wrong end of a pair
of opera-glasses. The people on it are moving, but their
faces are too small to see. I must try to turn the glasses
the right way round. And yet, when I try to do that the
figures are blurred at the edges and distorted. It is only
by, so to speak, looking at one portion of the stage at a
time that I can see things clearly.

I realise now, of course, that I had completely lost
my sense of proportion. It is always quite easy to realise
that afterwards. The remarkable thing is that during the
day which followed I did not lose touch with reality al¬
together. It was, to put it mildly, a fantastic day. The
first touch of fantasy was provided by, of all people, Major
Clandon-Hartley.

I was late down to breakfast and only the Vogels were
left on the terrace.

I had a swelling that felt the size of a cannon-ball on
the back of my head. Though not unduly painful now,
it was very tender, and when I walked it throbbed every
time my heels touched the ground.

I went rather gingerly to the terrace and sat down. The
Vogels were just getting up to go. They beamed at me
and came over. We exchanged good mornings. Then Herr
Vogel fired the first shot of the day.

118





‘Have you heard,’ he said, ‘that the English major and
his wife are leaving?’

My head throbbed violently. ‘When?’

‘We do not know. Monsieur Duclos had the news. He
is very well informed. It is best, I think. Best, that is,
that the English go. There would be difficulty after yester¬
day’s affair. We shall be seeing you on the beach this
morning?’ He winked. ‘The American miss is already
down there.’

I made some vague reply and they passed on. The very
thing that I had feared had happened. Not that there was
the remotest possibility that Major Clandon-Hartley was
a spy. That was too absurd. And yet there was the fact
of Mrs Clandon-Hartley being an Italian. My mind went
back to the Commissaire’s room and Beghin’s persistent
questions as to my Italian acquaintances. It was not
possible, but ...

There was only one thing to do; telephone Beghin
immediately. I gulped down my coffee and made my way
through the lounge and the hall to the drive. I got no
farther than halfway along it. Coming towards me from
the gap in the trees that led to the garden was the Major;
and he was showing every sign of wishing to intercept me.

‘Been looking for you everywhere, Vadassy,’ he greeted
me when he was within talking distance. I stopped and
he came up to me. He dropped his voice a trifle furtively.
‘If you’re not specially busy at the moment I’d like a
private word with you.’

I must confess that, in spite of the obvious stupidity of
the idea, the first thing that entered my head was the
thought that the Major was going to confess to being a
spy. I hesitated for a moment, then bowed formally.
‘Certainly, Major. I am at your disposal.’












Without a word he led the way back to the house and
into the writing-room. He drew up a chair. ‘Damned un¬
comfortable, these chairs,’ he said apologetically; ‘but
they’re better than those in the lounge.’

This was untrue. It was obvious that he had chosen the
writing-room because it was usually deserted. We sat
down.

‘I’m afraid I can’t offer you a cigarette,’ he said. ‘I
don’t smoke.’

His embarrassment was painful. I lit one of my own
cigarettes. He leaned forward in his chair, clasping and
unclasping his hands. He kept his eyes on the floor.

‘Look here, Vadassy,’ he said suddenly, ‘I wanted to
have a word with you for a special reason.’ He stopped.
I waited, looking at the end of my cigarette. In the silence
I began to hear the clock ticking on the mantelpiece.

‘You weren’t down on the beach yesterday afternoon,
were you?’ he asked unexpectedly.

‘No.’

‘I thought not. I couldn’t remember having seen you.’
He hesitated, fumbling with his words. ‘You probably
heard about what happened there. Lost my temper, I’m
afraid. Damned unpleasant.’

‘I did hear something about it.’

‘Thought you might have. You can’t expect people not
to talk about a thing like that.’ He stopped again. I began
to wonder when we were coming to the point. Suddenly
he raised his head and looked me in the eyes.

‘They’re saying that I’m mad, aren’t they, that I’m
not responsible for my actions?’

The question took me completely by surprise. I did
not know what to reply. I felt myself reddening.

‘I beg your pardon.’


120




He smiled faintly. ‘Sorry to spring that on you, but
I had to know where I stood. I can see by your face that
the answer is yes. Well, that’s what I wanted to have a
word with you about, that and something else.’

‘Oh, I see.’ I tried to make the answer casual, as
though I were used to people explaining why they were
regarded as mad. He did not appear to be listening.

‘I know,’ he said, ‘that it’s damned bad form unloading
one’s private affairs on strangers, that is, on people one’s
just met; but I have a good reason. You see, Vadassy,
you’re the only man I can talk to here.’ He regarded me
sombrely. ‘I hope you don’t m i nd.’

I said, wondering what on earth it was all about, that
I did not mind.

‘It’s good of you to say so,’ he went on; ‘these damned
foreigners ...’ He stopped, evidently realising that this
was scarcely tactful. ‘You see, Mr Vadassy, it’s about my
wife.’ He stopped again.

I was getting tired of this. ‘Supposing,’ I suggested,
‘that you take my good will for granted and say what you
want to say. You must remember that I have no idea
what you are talking about.’

He flushed. There was a suggestion of a return to the
militar y mann er. ‘Quite right. No good beating about
the bush. I wouldn’t be sitting here wasting your time
at all if there wasn’t a reason. Put my cards on the table.
Tell you the whole story. Then you can judge for your¬
self. Don’t want you to get the wrong idea.’ He drove
his fist gently into the palm of his other hand. ‘I’ll put
my cards on the table,’he repeated.

‘I met my wife early in 1918 in Rome.’ He paused,
and I was afraid that there were going to be more
hesitations; but this time he went on.


121










‘It was just after the Italians had folded up at Caporetto
and retreated across the Piave. Fd been transferred to the
staff as attache to a divisional general. Well, the British
and French War Offices were pretty worried about the
Italian situation. Most of the people thought, of course
that the Austrians were after the industrial areas around
Milan; but there were whispers, and pretty loud ones
that the Austro-German General Staff wouldn’t have de¬
tached so many troops from the Western front for that
alone and that their real plan was to outflank the Swiss
barrier via the North Italian plain with Lyons as the
objective. A sort of Drang nach Westen .’ He stumbled
over the German.

‘Anyway, ourselves and the French sent guns and
troops into Italy to stop the rot, and a few of us were
drafted there to sort things out. I went to Pisa first.
They’d got their railway system into a shocking mess.
Of course, I knew damn-all about railways, but there was
a promoted ranker with me who’d had some civilian ex¬
perience in England, and together we got along famously.
Later in ’18 they sent me down to Rome.

‘Have you ever been in Rome in winter? It’s not at
all bad. There was a pretty big British colony there at
the time, but it was mostly army, and it was part of our
job to mix with the Italians and get friendly. For two
pins they’d have made peace. Well, I’d been there about
a couple of months when I had a bit of bad luck. You
know, some of those Italian cavalry officers are
riders and a bit mad. So are the horses. Anyway, I was
out for a canter with one of these chaps one day, and he
put his horse at a jump that I shouldn’t like to try on
a Grand National winner. My animal tried to follow, and
I took a toss that busted a leg and a couple of ribs.











‘I was living in a hotel, and as they couldn’t look after
me there I had to go into hospital. The trouble was that
just about that time there’d been a dust-up in the north.
The wounded were being sent down by the trainload
from the base hospitals to make room for the fresh
casualties. Beds were scarce and the place they took me
to was overcrowded and hopelessly understaffed. I sent
out an S.O.S. to an Italian staff officer I knew, and the
next day I was moved to a huge private villa just outside
Rome. It belonged to a family who had volunteered to
nurse convalescent officers. Their name was Staretti.’

He glanced at me. T dare say you’re wondering what
the hell all this has to to do with what happened on the
beach yesterday afternoon.’

I was actually wondering more than that. I was won¬
dering what, in any case, the happenings on the beach
had to do with me. But I merely nodded.

‘I’m coming to that,’ he said. He began to knead his
fingers as though they were cold.

‘The Starettis were a curious family. At least I thought
so. The mother was dead. There were only the old man
and his children—two daughters, Maria and Serafina, and
a son, Batista. Maria was about twenty-five and Serafina
was two years younger. Batista was thirty-two. Staretti
himself was a dried-up, wizened old chap with a shock
of white hair. He was seventy, a big banker in Rome,
and as rich as Croesus. Well, you know you can’t live in
somebody’s house for weeks on end without getting a
pretty good idea of how each one feels about the others.

I used to sit out in the garden most of the day with my
leg and ribs strapped up, and they used to come and talk
to me. That is, all except old Staretti, and he was nearly
always at his office or seeing ministers. He was quite


123





important in Rome at that time. But Maria used to come
out a lot and sometimes Serafina, though she used to tajk
about nothing except the Italian who’d got me in there.
They were going to be married. Then Batista started
coming.

‘Batista hated the old man and the old mail hadn’t got
much time for him. I think quite a lot of the trouble
was because Batista had something wrong with his heart
and wasn’t fit enough for the army. The old man was
very hot on smashing the Austrians. Anyway, Batista used
to moan to me about how his father overworked him and
kept him short of money, and tell me what he’d do when
old Staretti died and the money came to him. It used
to get a bit boring at times. He was a nasty piece of work,
and fat and flabby even then; but I’d got nothing much
to do except look at the scenery, and that was even more
boring—just a long, flat plain with a clump of cypresses
here and there, dull. But one thing struck me about
Batista. He had his father’s business instincts, a sort of
complicated cunning that saw about three moves ahead
of everyone else. I found out a bit more about that later.
. ‘Those weeks went pretty quickly, all thin g s considered.
Maria and I got on pretty well together. It wasn’t exacdy
a nurse-and-patient business, because they had a proper
nurse in to look after me. But Maria didn’t like all these
young pups of Italian officers who used to prance round
taking a darn sight too much for granted. She couldn’t
handle them like her sister. Anyway, in the end Maria and
I arranged that when the war was over I would come
back and that we would get married. But we said nothing
about that to anyone, though I think Serafina had a pretty
shrewd notion of tie way things were. You see, she
being a Catholic made it difficult, and we didn’t want the


124






#

thing discussed until we were ready. In the spring I was
drafted back to France.

‘Well, things went all right with me until August, when
I was caught in a gas-shell bombardment. It was Ir tis h
in 1919 before they finally shot me out, with about half
a lung in working order, and told me to live in a warm,
dry climate. Well, that suited me, and I made tracks for
Rome. They were all very pleased to see me, especially
Maria. A few weeks later we announced our engagement.

‘It seemed at first as if everything was fine. Old Staretti
was delighted. I think he was a bit sorry that I hadn’t
an arm or a leg shot off instead of being gassed, but he
promised us the earth. Plans were going ahead for the
wedding and the climate was working wonders with my
chest; and then the trouble started.

‘By this time Batista was pretty high up in his father’s
business, and one day he came to me and asked me if
I’d like to make a packet of money. Well, naturally, I
wanted to hear more about it. It appeared that a lot of
people were making comfortable little fortunes by buying
up surplus machine-guns from the Italian government,
cheap, and shipping them to Syria, where they fetched
about six times as much from the Arabs. The only thing
you needed was capital to buy the guns. That was the
way Batista put it.

‘Well, as you can imagine, I jumped at the chance.
Batista moaned that he’d only got about a thousand quid
in dollars and that we should need at least five to main*
it worth while. I agreed to put up the four. It was just
about all I had apart from my pension and a small
reversionary interest in an estate belonging to my cousin,
and I was keen to multiply the four by six.

‘I knew nothing about business. Never been able to


125





make head or tale of it. Give me some men and guns and
a job to do with them and I’ll do it. But I’ve got no head
for pettifogging business dealings. I left all that side of it
to Batista. He said that it had to be cash, so I got cash.
He said that he’d look after the details. I let him. I even
signed a lot of papers that he gave me to sign. I may have
been a fool, but anyway my Italian wasn’t so very good
that I was in a position to check up on him even if I’d
wanted to.

‘Nothing happened for a time, then one day old Staretti
sent for me. He said that it had been brought to his notice
that I had engaged in a business deal with two men, whose
names I had never even heard of, in connection with a
shipment of machine-guns to Syria and that I had given
them a written guarantee to pay them twenty-five per
cent of the selling price in Syria. I said that I knew noth¬
ing about any twenty-five per cent, but that I had invested
four thousand pounds with Batista in a shipment of
machine-guns. I knew nothing more than that about the
business side. He had better ask Batista.

‘Well, he got very angry at that. There was my written
guarantee. Had I or had I not signed it? I admitted sign¬
ing it, but said that I had not known what I was signing.
He told me not to play the fool and demanded an explana¬
tion. To cut a long story short, it turned out that the
paper I’d signed had been a guarantee of twenty-five per
cent to the two men at the Italian War Office responsible
for selling the machine-guns—in other words, a large-
scale bribe. Well, the political situation was a bit touchy
then and the War Minister had come down on old Staretti
like a ton of bricks, wanting to know what the hell his
future son-in-law was playing at. Pretty embarrassing for
the old boy, it was.


126





‘Of course, I denied it absolutely, and then he sent
for Batista. The moment Batista came into the room I
knew that I’d been done to a turn. There was a smug
grin on his face that made me long to knock him down.
He pleaded complete ignorance of the whole affair. He
said that he was very shocked.’

I saw the Major clench his fists until the knuckles
showed white.

‘There’s not much more to it,’ he went on at last.
‘Apparently old Staretti had altered his will, leaving half
his money to Maria. Batista was out to scotch tha t And
he did. He also relieved me of my four thousand. I had
a dreadful scene with the old boy. He accused me of try¬
ing to blacken his son’s name and of marrying his daughter
for his money. He said that the marriage was off and
that if I didn’t get out of Italy within twenty-four hours
he’d have me arrested and risk the scandal. I went,’ he
added slowly, ‘but I hadn’t finished being a damned fool
yet because I let Maria go with me against her father’s
wishes. We were married in Bale.’

He stopped. I said nothing. There was nothing to say.
But he hadn’t finished yet. He cleared his throat.

‘Women are funny creatures,’ he said inanely. He
paused. ‘I don’t think my good lady knew just how litde
money I had when she said she wanted to go with me.
She’d been used to something different from cheap hotels.
We tried England for a bit, but my chest wouldn’t stand
it. Then we went to Spain. When the trouble started
there we had to clear out. We went to Juan les Pins for a
time, but it got too expensive in the season, so we moved
along here. She hates it all. She should never have left
her own people. We’re all foreigners to her. She even
hates speaking English. And sometimes I think she hates


127




me. She’s never really forgiven me for letting Batista
put it across me. She says that I must be mad. Some¬
times she tells other people that, too.’ There was infinite
weariness in his voice now.

‘You should have seen her when she recognised Batista
yesterday. She knows what he did to me, yet she was
overjoyed to see him. It fairly bowled me over. And then
he started. He’s got the old man’s money now, and he
laughed at me. He made a joke out of the way he’d
treated me. A joke! Good God, if I’d had a gun in my
hand I’d have shot him. As it was, I just hit him and
not even in his smug, grinning face, but in his fat belly.
The swine!’ His voice had risen and he began to cough.
But he managed to stop himself. He looked at me chal-
lengingly. ‘You probably think I’m a damned fool, eh?’

I muttered a denial.

He laughed bitterly. ‘You aren’t far wrong. And you’re
going to think me a damned outsider as well because
I’m going to ask you to do something for me.’

For some reason my head throbbed painfully. At last
we were coming to the point. I said, ‘Yes?’ and waited.

He had become formal and embarrassed again. He
stumbled over the words as though each one was an
effort. ‘I wouldn’t have told you all this, Vadassy, but I
wanted you to understand the circumstances. Damned
difficult thing to ask anyone. My good lady and I, we can’t
stay in this place after that business yesterday. Everybody
gossiping. Embarrassing for all concerned. Climate doesn’t
suit my chest, either. There’s a boat that leaves Marseilles
every Monday for Algiers. Thought we’d catch it. Trouble
is—’ he hesitated. ‘Hate to bother you with my private
affairs like this, but the fact is I’m in a bit of a comer.
Wasn’t expecting this Algiers trip. Quite a bill from Koche




as well. These things happen. Must sound to you hor¬
ribly like a hard-luck story. Can’t stand cadgers myself.
But the fact is, Vadassy, that if you could possibly lend
me a couple of thousand francs until the end of the
month it would be helpful. Hate to ask you, but you know
how it is.’

I had not the slightest idea what to say, but I opened
my mouth to speak. He forestalled me.

‘Of course, I shouldn’t expect you to lend me money
without security. I’ll naturally give you a post-dated
cheque on Cox’s bank—that is, if you don’t mind j t ^
pounds. Safer than francs, what!’ He gave a forced laugh.
There were small beads of perspiration on his temples.
Shouldn t dream of troubling you at all, of course, but
as we’ve got to leave this place it puts me in a
awkward position. Know you’ll understand. You’re the
only person here I’d care to ask, and—well, I don’t have
to tell you how much I’d appreciate it.’

I stared at him helplessly. At that moment I would
have given almost anything to have had in my pocket five
thousand francs, to have been able to smilp cheerfully,
to produce my notecase, to reassure him. ‘Good heavens,
yes, Major! Why didn’t you say so before? No trouble
at all. Better make it five thousand. After all, it’s only a
matter of cashing a cheque, and a Cox’s cheque is as good
as a Bank of England note any day. Delighted to be of
assistance. Glad you asked me.’ But I had no five thousand
francs. I had not even two thousand. I had my return
ticket to Paris and just enough money to pay my bill at
the Reserve and live for a week. I could do nothing but
stare at him, and listen to the clock ticking on the mantel¬
piece. He looked up at me.

‘I’m sorry,’ I stammered, and then again : ‘I’m sorry.’

129

1







He stood up. ‘Quite all right,’ he said, with ghastly
unconcern; ‘not really important. Just wondered if you
could manage it, that’s all. Sorry to have taken up so
much of your time. Damned inconsiderate of me. Forget
about the money. Just wondered, that’s all. Enjoyed
having a jaw, though. Not often I have a chance of speak¬
ing English.’ He drew himself up. ‘Well, I’ll be getting
along to do a little packing. Expect we shall be leaving
early tomorrow. And I shall have to get a wire off. See you
before we go.’

Too late I found tongue.

‘I can’t tell you how sorry I am, Major, that I can’t
help you. It’s not a question of not wanting to rash a
cheque for you. I haven’t got two thousand francs. I’ve
only just got enough to pay my bill here. If I had any
money I should be only too delighted to lend it to you.
I’m terribly sorry. I—’ Now that I had started I wanted
to go on apologising, to embarrass myself to restore his
self-esteem. But I had no chance to do so for, even as I
was speaking, he turned on his heel and walked out of
die room.

When, some ten minutes later, I telephoned to the
Commissariat and asked to speak to the Commissaire,
Beghin’s irritable voice answered.

‘Hello, Vadassy!’

‘I have some thing to report.’

‘Well?’

‘Major and Mrs Clandon-Hardey may be leaving to¬
morrow. He has tried to borrow money from me to pay
his and his wife’s fare to Algiers.’

‘Well? Did you lend him the money?’

‘My employers have not yet paid me for the Toulon
photographs,’I retorted recklessly.


130





To my surprise this impertinence was greeted with a
squeaky chuckle from the other end.

‘Anything else?’

Rashly, I gave way to the impulse to deliver a further
jibe.

‘I don’t suppose you’ll think it important, but last
night I was knocked down by somebody in die garden
and searched.’ Even as I said it I knew that I had been
very foolish. This time there was no answering chuckle
but a sharp order to repeat myself. I did so.

There was a significant silence. Then :

‘Why didn’t you say so at first instead of wasting time?
Did you identify the man? Explain yourself.’

I explained myself. Then came the question that I
had been dreading.

‘Has your room been searched?’

‘I think so.’

‘What do you mean by “think so”?’

‘Two rolls of film were taken from my suitcase.’

‘When?’

‘Yesterday.’

‘Was anything else taken?’ The question was very
deliberate.

‘No.’ The camera, after all, had been taken from the
chair in the hall.

There was another silence. Now he was going to ask
me if the camera was safe. But he did not do so. I thought
we had been cut off, and said: ‘Hello! ’ I was told to wait
a minute.

My head throbbing painfully, I waited two minutes. I
could hear a murmur of voices, Beghin’s squeak and the
Commissaire’s growl, but I could not catch what they
were saying. At last Beghin returned to the telephone.







‘Vadassy!’

‘Yes?’

‘Listen carefully. You are to go straight back to the
Reserve, see Koche, and inform him that your suitcase
has been forced open and that several things have been
stolen—a silver cigarette-case and a box containing a dia¬
mond pin, a gold watch-chain and two rolls of film. Make
a fuss about it. Tell the other guests. Complain. I want
everyone at the Reserve to know about it. But don’t ask
for the police.’

‘But—’

‘Don’t argue. Do as you are told. Was your suitcase
forced?’

‘No, but—’

‘Then force it yourself before you tell Koche. Now
understand this. You are to bring in the question of the
films as an afterthought. You are annoyed principally about
the valuables. Is that clear?’

‘Yes, but I have no cigarette-case or diamond pin or
gold watch-chain.’

‘Of course you haven’t. They have been stolen. Now
get on with it.’

‘This is impossible, absurd. You cannot force me to do
this—’ But he had already hung up.

I walked back to the hotel with murder in my heart.
If there was a bigger fool than myself in this business, it
was Beghin. But he had nothing to lose except a spy.


132





II

I WENT about the business of concocting the evidence
with bitter thoroughness.

I got out my suitcase and locked it. Then I looked
round for something with which to force the latches open.
I made the first attempt with a pair of nail scissors. The
locks were flimsy enough, but it was difficult to get any
leverage on the scissors. After five minutes’ unsuccessful
labour, I snapped one of the blades. I wasted several
more minutes searching idly for a stronger tool. In desper¬
ation I took the key from the bedroom door and used the
flat steel loop on it as a lever. The locks eventually yielded
to this treatment, but I bent the key and had to spend
more time straightening it. Then I opened the lid, stirred
up the contents and, contorting my features into an ex¬
pression of outraged innocence, hurried downstairs to find
Koche.

He was not in his office. By the time I had traced him
to the beach where he was lounging about in s wimming
trunks, my outraged innocence had relaxed into a sort
of cringing anxiety. The Skeltons, the French couple, and
Monsieur Duclos were down there with him. I played
with the idea of awaiting a more opportune moment,
but rejected it. I must remember that a robbery had been
committed. Objects of value had been stolen from
my room. I must behave as any normal person would
behave under such circumstances; I must report to the


133







manager even if he was clad only in a pair of swimming
trunks. A sleek, black-coated manager "would have been
more appropriate to the occasion, but I must do the
best I could with Koche.

I ran down the steps to the beach and started across
the sand towards him. At this point, however, there was
a disconcerting interruption. Skelton, hearing my footsteps
on the stairs, had looked round the edge of his sunshade
and seen me.

‘Hey!’ he called over. ‘Haven’t seen you all morning.
Are you coming in the water before lunch?’

I hesitated; then, realising that there was nothing else
for it, I went over. Mary Skelton, who was lying face
downwards on the sand, turned her head and cocked an
eye at me.

‘We thought you’d deserted us, Mr Vadassy. You’ve
no right to trifle with the kiddies’ affections like that. Get
into your swim suit and come and give us the dirt on the
affair Clandon-Hartley. We saw you talking to him through
the writing-room window after breakfast.’

‘No finesse!’ complained her brother. ‘I was going to in¬
troduce the subject gradually. What about it, Mr Vadassy?’

If you 11 excuse me, I said hurriedly, ‘I must have a
word with Koche. See you later.’

‘That’s a deal! ’ he called after me.

Koche was talking to Roux and Duclos. Evidently the
quarrel of the previous night had been forgotten. I in¬
terrupted him in the middle of a disquisition on the virtues
of Grenoble. I was tight-lipped and grave.

‘Excuse me. Monsieur, but I should like to speak
with you privately. It is rather urgent.’

He raised his eyebrows and excused himself to the
others. We moved a little away.



‘What can I do for you. Monsieur?’

‘I regret to disturb you, but I am afraid I must ask
you to step up to my room. While I was in the village
just now, my suitcase has been broken open and several
valuable objects stolen from it.’

The eyebrows went up again. He whistled softly
between his teeth and glanced at me quickly. Then with
a muttered ‘excuse me’ he walked across the sand, picked
up his bathing wrap and sandals, put them on, and re¬
joined me.

‘I will come with you immediately.’

Under the curious eyes of the others we left the beach.

On the way up to my room he asked me what was
missing. I gave him Beghin’s grotesque selection and ad¬
ded the tidbit about the films. He nodded and was silent.
I began to feel apprehensive. True, there was no possible
way of his discovering the whole business was a put-up
j°b; yet, now that I had started the thing moving, I was
uneasy. For all his lazy, indolent manner, Koche was no
fool and I could not quite forget the fact that it was
not impossible for Koche himself to have taken the films
and also stunned me in the garden the night before. In
that case he would know that I was lying. The conse¬
quences might be distinctly unpleasant for me. I cursed
Beghin with renewed fervour.

Koche inspected my work on die suitcase locks with
gloomy interest. Then he straightened his back and his
eyes met mine.

‘You say that you left your room at about nine o’clock?’

‘Yes.’

‘Was the suitcase all right, then?’

^" es - The last thing I did before I went down was to
lock the case and push it under the bed.’


135




He looked at his watch. ‘It is now eleven twenty. How
long ago did you return?’

‘About fifteen minutes ago. But I did not go to the
suitcase straight away. As soon as I saw what had hap¬
pened, I came straight to you. It is disgraceful,’ I added
lamely.

He nodded and eyed me speculatively. ‘Do you mind
coming down to my office, Monsieur? I should like a
detailed description of the missing objects.’

‘Certainly. But I must warn you. Monsieur,’ I
mumbled, ‘that I shall hold you responsible and that I
shall expect the immediate return of the valuables and
the punishment of the thief.’

‘Naturally,’ he said politely. ‘I have no doubt that I
shall be able to return your property to you within a
very short time. There is no cause for you to worry.’

Feeling rather like an amateur actor who has forgotten
his lines, I followed Koche down to his office. He closed
the door carefully, drew up a chair for me and picked up
a pen.

‘Now, Monsieur. The cigarette-case first, if you please.
It is, I think you said, a gold one.’

I looked at him quickly. He was writing something on
the paper. I panicked. Had I said that it was a gold one
when we were coming up from the beach? For the life
of me I could not remember. Or was he trying to trap
me? But I had an inspiration.

No, a silver case, gold lines. It has,’ I said, war min g
to my work, ‘my initials, “J.V.”, engraved in one corner
and is machined on the outside. It holds ten cigarettes
and the elastic is missing.’

‘Thank you, and the chain?’

I remembered a second-hand chain I had seen dis-

136



played in a jeweller’s window near the Gare Mont¬
parnasse.

‘Eighteen-carat gold, thick, old-fashioned links, heavy.
It has a small gold medallion on it commemorating the
Brussels Exhibition of 1901.’

He wrote it all down carefully.

‘And now the pin. Monsieur.’

This was not so easy. ‘Just a pin, Monsieur. A tie-pin
about six centimetres long with a small diamond about
three millimetres in diameter in the head.’ I gave way to
a weak impulse. ‘The diamond,’ I said, with a self-
conscious laugh, ‘is paste.’

‘But the pin itself is gold?’

‘Rolled gold.’

‘And the box in which these objects were left?’

‘A tin box. A cigarette box. A German cigarette box.
I cannot remember the brand. There was also in it two
rolls of film, Contax film . They had been exposed.’

‘You have a Contax camera?’

‘Yes.’

He looked at me again. ‘I assume that you made sure
that the camera was safe. Monsieur. A thief would get
a good price for a camera.’

My heart missed about two beats. I had blundered
badly.

‘The camera?’ I said stupidly. ‘I did not look. I left
it in the drawer.’

He stood up. ‘Then I suggest, Monsieur, that we go
and look immediately.’

‘Yes, of course.’ I was, I felt, very red in the face.

We went upstairs again and along to my room. I pre¬
pared myself carefully for the emission of the suitable
cries of dismay and anger that would be necessary.


137





I rushed anxiously to the chest of drawers, pulled
open the top drawer and rummaged feverishly inside it.
Then I turned round slowly and dramatically.

‘Gone! ’ I said grimly. ‘This is too much. That camera
is worth nearly five thousand francs. The thief must be
found without delay. I demand, Monsieur, that something
is done immediately.’

To my surprise and confusion a faint smilp appeared
on his lips.

‘Something will certainly be done, Monsieur,’ he said
calmly, ‘but in the case of the camera, no thing will be
necessary. Look!’

I followed the direction of his nod. There, on the
chair beside the bed, was a Contax camera complete with
case.

‘I must,’ I said stupidly, as we went downstairs a gain^
‘have forgotten that I had left it on the chair.’

He nodded. ‘Or the thief removed it from the drawer
and then forgot to take it after all.’ I thought it was my
guilty conscience that detected a faint note of irony in
his voice.

‘Anyway,’ I said, with unaffected gaiety, ‘I have the
camera.’

‘We must hope,’ he said gravely, ‘that the other things
will reappear as quickly.’

I agreed as enthusiastically as I could. We returned to
the office.

‘What,’ he asked, ‘is the value of the cigarette-case and
the watch-chain?’

I thought carefully. ‘It is hard to say. About eight
hundred francs for the case and about five hundred for
the chain, I should think. Both were presents. The p in.

138



though intrinsically worthless, possesses great sentimental
value for me. As for the films: well, I should be sorry
to lose them, naturally, but—’ I shrugged.

‘I understand. They were insured, the case and the
chain?’

‘No.’

He put down his pen. ‘You will appreciate, Monsieur,
that in these affairs suspicion is bound to fall on the
servants. I shall question them first. I should prefer to
do it alone. I hope you will not think it necessary to call
in the police at this stage and will trust me to han dle the
matter discreetly.’

‘Of course.’

‘Also, Monsieur, I would personally appreciate it if you
would say nothing of this unfortunate affair to the other
guests.’

‘Naturally not.’

‘Thank you. You will realise that considerable damage
is done to the reputation of a small hotel such as this by
such unpleasant affairs. I will report to you the moment
I have completed my inquiries.’

I went, feeling distinctly uncomfortable. Koche had
asked that the other guests should not be told; and for
my part I would have been only too pleased to comply
with the request. The less said about the business the
better I should have been pleased. But Beghin had in¬
sisted on the news being broadcast to the other guests;
he had been quite clear on the point. I must make a fuss.
And there were the wretched servants to be considered.
It was altogether a most unhappy situation; and, as far
as I could see, utterly pointless as well: unless there was
something going on about which I knew nothing. What
cigarette-cases and watch-chains had to do with spies








was beyond my comprehension. Did Beghin propose to
use the alleged robbery as a pretext on which to arrest
the spy? Absurd! Where was the evidence to come from?
My two rolls of film were, no doubt, developed and
thrown away by now; and the cigarette-case and watch-
chain did not exist. There was only one sensible way of
tackling the problems. Identify the spy first, then catch
him with my camera in his possession.

My camera?

I took the last few stairs at a run and f or m y

room. It did not take me more than a few seconds to
confirm my fears. This was my camera. The incriminat¬
ing evidence had been politely returned.

I changed into my swimming trunks miserably. I could,
of course, lie to Beghin. I could say that the cameras had
been re-exchanged without my knowledge. I could plead
ignorance. I could suggest that it had been done when
my room had been searched. After all, I couldn’t be ex¬
pected to examine the number on the camera at hourly
intervals throughout the day. If I was careful there was
no reason why Beghin should know that for about eighteen
hours I had had neither of the cameras. That was unless
he caught the spy. Then the fat would be in the fire.
Beghin might even have to release the man again. Not
that there was the remotest chance of catching him with
stories of forced suitcases and stolen watch-chains. Still,
that was Beghin’s affair. I was only a pawn in the gam^
a fly caught in the cog-wheels. A sickly, sticky steam of
self-pity welled up into my mind. I stood in my shirt
and looked at myself in the mirror. Poor fool! What
skinny legs! I finished changing. As I went down the
stairs I saw Schimler follow Koche into the office and shut
the door. Schimler! I experienced an empty f iling


140






inside my chest. That was another thing Today I was to
search Schimler’s room.

The Vogels had now joined the French couple on the
beach. The Americans were in the water. I went over to
Monsieur Duclos, drew a deck-chair alongside his and
sat down. For a minute or two we exchanged common¬
places. Then I began work.

‘You, Monsieur, are a man of the world. I should be
grateful for your advice in a delicate matter.’

A look of pure pleasure suffused his face. He stroked
his beard gravely. ‘My experience, such as it is, is at your
disposal. Monsieur.’ He rolled his eyes archly. ‘It is, per¬
haps, concerning the American miss that you wish mv
advice?’

‘I beg your pardon.’

He chuckled roguishly. ‘You need not be embarrassed,
my friend. If I may say so, your glances in her direction
have been remarked by all. But the brother and sister
are inseparable, eh? Believe me, Monsieur, I have some
judgment in these affairs.’ He lowered his voice and
brought his head nearer mine. ‘I have noticed that the
miss also looks at you.’ He dropped his voice still further
and sprayed the next sentence right into my ear. ‘She is
especially interested when you are dressed as you are
now.’ He giggled into his beard.

I stared at h i m coldly. ‘What I had to say was
nothing to do with Miss Skelton.’

‘No?’He looked disappointed.

‘I am more concerned at the moment with the fact that
several objects of value have been stolen from my room.’

His pince-nez quivered so much that they fell off. He
caught them neatly and replaced them on his nose.

‘A robbery?’


141



‘Precisely. While I was in the village this morning my
locked suitcase was forced open and a cigarette-case a
gold watch-chain, a diamond pin, and two rolls of film
were stolen. The value of, the property is over two
thousand francs.’

‘ Formidable!’

‘I am desolated by the loss. The pin was of great
sentimental value.’

‘C’est affreux!’

‘Indeed it is! I have complained to Koche, and he is
questioning the servants. But—and this. Monsieur, is the
matter in which I should welcome your guidance—I am
not satisfied with the way in which Monsieur Koche is
conducting the affair. He does not seem to realise the
gravity of the loss. Should I be justified in putting the
matter before the police?’

‘The police?’ Monsieur Duclos wriggled with excite¬
ment. ‘Why, yes! It is without a doubt an affair for the
police. I will, if you wish, come with you now myself to
the Poste.’

‘And yet,’ I said hurriedly, ‘Koche was of the opinion
that the police would be well left out of the affair. He
is to question the servants. Perhaps it would be better
to wait and hear the result of this questioning.’

‘Ah, yes. Perhaps that would be better.’ He was clearly
reluctant to abandon the police so soon. ‘But ...’

‘Thank you. Monsieur,’ I put in smoothly; ‘I am grate¬
ful for your advice. It has confirmed my own inclinations
in the matter.’ I saw his eyes straying towards the Vogels
and the French people. ‘Naturally, you will appreciate
that I speak in confidence. We must be discreet at this
stage.’

He nodded portentously. ‘Naturally, Monsieur. Please


142





consider my experience as a businessman at your disposal.
You may trust me.’ He paused, then tweaked the sleeve
of my wrap. ‘Have you any suspicions?’

‘None. Suspicions are dangerous things.’

‘That is so, but—’ He dropped his voice and began to
spray into my ear again: ‘Have you considered this Eng¬
lish major? A violent man, that! And what does he do
for a living? Nothing. He has been there three months.
I will tell you something more. This morning after break¬
fast he came to me on the lower terrace and requested a
loan of two thousand francs. He needs money badly, that
one. He offered five per cent interest per month.’

‘You refused?’

‘Naturally. I was very angry. He said that he required
the money to go to Algiers. Why should I pay for him
to go to Algiers? Let him work like other men. There
was also something about his wife, but I could not under¬
stand. His French is incomprehensible. He is certainly a
little mad.’

‘And you think he stole from my room?’

Monsieur Duclos smiled knowingly and held up a
protesting hand. ‘Ah, no, Monsieur, I do not say that. I
merely suggest .’ He had the air of negotiating a very
tricky legal subtlety. ‘I point out merely that this man
has no occupation, that he needs money, that he is
desperate. No man who was not desperate would offer
five per cent per month. He said something to me of
expecting money that had failed to arrive. I do not accuse
this Major. I merely suggest to you.’

I saw that the Americans had come out of the water.
I stood up.

‘Thank you. Monsieur. I will bear the suggestion in
mind. Meanwhile, of course, we must be discreet. Per-


143




haps we could discuss the matter further later in thp
day.’

‘When,’ he agreed, ‘we have heard the results of the
preliminary interrogations.’

‘Precisely.’ I bowed.

By the time I had got across the beach to the Skeltons
he was deep in conversation with the French couple and
the Vogels. I did not have to guess at the subject of the
conversation. Monsieur Duclos could be relied upon to
carry out Beghin’s instructions to the letter.

In defiance of the printed notice in the bedrooms,
Skelton was drying himself on one of the hotel towels!

‘Ah!’ was his greeting. ‘The man with the news!’

His sister made room for me under the sunshade.
‘Gome and sit down, Mr Vadassy. No more sneaking off
with Monsieur Koche. We want the truth—all of it.’

I sat down. ‘I’m sorry I had to run off like that, but
something rather nasty has happened.’

‘What, again?’

‘I’m afraid so. This morning, while I was down in
the village, my suitcase was broken open and several
things taken from it.’

Skelton sat down beside me as though his legs had
given way. ‘Phew! That is nasty. Anything valuable?’

I repeated the list.

‘When did you say it happened?’ It was the girl who
spoke.

‘While I was down in the village. Between about nine
and ten thirty.’

But it was about nine thirty when we saw you talking
to the Major.’

‘Yes, but I left my room at nine.’

Skelton leaned forward confidentially. ‘Say, you don’t


144





suppose the Major was engaging you in conversation
while his wife did the job, do you?’

‘Shut up, Warren. This is serious. It was probably one
of the servants.’

Skelton snorted impatiently. ‘Why should it be? It
makes me tired. Whenever anything’s stolen everybody
always looks around for a servant or messenger-boy or
somebody else who can’t hit back to blame it on. If we’re
going to be serious, what was Papa Switzer doing gum¬
shoeing about the corridor this morning?’

‘That wasn’t on Mr Vadassy’s side of the house. What’s
the number of your room, Mr Vadassy>’

‘Six.’

She began to rub oil into her arms. ‘There you are!
It was the other side of the house, the room next but
one to mine. That friend of Monsieur Koche’s has it.’

I grasped a ha n dful of sand and let it trickle through
my fingers. ‘What number is that?’ I said idly.

Fourteen, I think. But the Switzer wasn’t gumshoeing.
He’d dropped a five-franc piece in the corridor.’

‘What does Koche say about it, Mr Vadassy?’

‘I’m afraid he suspects the servants.’

‘Naturally,’ said the girl vigorously. ‘Warren’s too dam
fond of taking up the appropriate attitude. We all know
that it ought to be a rich old meany with a touch of
kleptomania. The fact of the matter probably is that it’s
some poor little underpaid chambermaid with a boy¬
friend in the village she wants to give a cigarette-case to.’

‘And a gold watch-chain, and a diamond pin, and a
couple of spools of fi l m ?’ queried her brother sarcastically.

‘Maybe it’s a waiter.’

‘Or maybe it’s old Duclos or the Major. Incidentally,
what about the Major, Mr Vadassy?’

145

K




I decided not to regale them with the Major’s life story.
‘He merely wanted to offer a general apology for the dis¬
turbance down here yesterday. The man from the yacht
was his brother-in-law. He had had a quarrel with him
over some money matter. The brother-in-law brought the
question up again and the Major lost his temper. He ex¬
plained that his wife was distraught and that she did not
really mean that he was mad.’

‘Is that all? Why did he tell you about it?’

‘I think he was very embarrassed by the whole affair.
As I was not here, he picked on me.’ I was not going to
tell them that Monsieur Duclos had received an abridged
apology but the same request for money. ‘The Major and
his wife are, in any case, leaving, and ...’

‘In other words, Warren,’ put in the girl, ‘we’re to
mind our own business and not behave like a couple of
nosey kids. Is that right, Mr Vadassy?’

It was, but I blushed and began to protest. Warren
Skelton interrupted me. ‘I smell drink! Come on. You
can’t go swimming now; it’s nearly lunchtime.’

While he had gone to fetch the drinks the girl and I
walked up to the tables on the lower terrace.

‘You mustn’t take any notice of anything Warren says,’
she said, smiling. ‘This is his first trip abroad.’

‘You’ve been before?’

For a moment she did not reply, and I thought she
had not heard me. She seemed to hesitate as though
she were about to say something important. Then I saw
her shrug her shoulders slightly. ‘Yes, I’ve been before.’
As we sat down she smiled at me. ‘Warren says there’s
something mysterious about you.’

‘Does he?’

‘He says that you look like a man with something

146




to hide. He says, too, that it’s not natural that a man
should speak more than one language perfectly. I think
he rather hopes you’ll turn out to be a spy or something
exciting like that.’

I felt myself reddening again. ‘A spy?’

I told you you mustn t take any notice of what he
says.’ She smiled again at me. Her eyes, intelligent and
amused, met mine across the table. Suddenly I wanted
to confide in her, to tell her that I was indeed a man
with something to hide, to gain her sympathy, her help.
I leaned forward across the table.

I should like ... I began. But I never told her what
I should like, and I have forgotten now what I was going
to say, for at that moment her brother reappeared carry¬
ing a tray of drinks. It was, no doubt, as well that he did
so.

‘The waiters were busy on the terrace,’ he said, ‘so I
brought them myself.’ He raised his glass. ‘Well, Mr
Vadassy, here’s hoping that the chambermaid’s boy friend
doesn’t like your cigarette-case! ’

‘Or,’ the girl added gravely, ‘the two spools of film. We
mustn’t forget them.''





12


I did not eat much lunch.

For one thing, my head had begun to ache again; for
another, I received with my soup a message from K5che.
The manager would be grateful if Monsieur Vadassy
could spare the time to call in at the office after luncheon.
Yes, Monsieur Vadassy could and would spare the time.
But the prospect disturbed me. Supposing Koche had
decided that some ‘poor little underpaid chambermaid’
was the culprit. What was I supposed to do? The idiotic
Beghin had made no allowances for that contingency. The
wretched girl would naturally deny the charge. What
could I say? Was I to stand by and see some perfectly
innocent person browbeaten by a zealous Koche and ac¬
cused of a theft that had not taken place? It was an
abominable state of affairs.

But I need not, as it happened, have worried about
that. The chambermaid was perfectly safe.

Monsieur Duclos pounced on me as I left the terrace.

‘Have you decided to call in the police, Monsieur?’

‘Not yet. I am going to see Koche.’

He stroked his beard gloomily. ‘I have been thinking,
Monsieur. Every hour we delay is in the thief’s favour.’

‘Quite so. But...’

‘Speaking as a businessman, I counsel immediate
action. You must be firm with Koche, Monsieur.’ He
thrust his beard forward ferociously.

148





‘I shall be very firm. Monsieur, I..

But before I could get away the Vogels came up, shook
hands with me and expressed their sorrow at my loss.
Monsieur Duclos was not in the least put out by this
evidence of his treachery.

‘We have agreed, Monsieur Vogel and I,’ he stated,
‘that the Commissaire of Police should be called in.’

‘Five thousand francs,’ nodded Herr Vogel weightily,
‘is a serious loss. A matter for the police, without a doubt.
Monsieur Roux is of the same opinion. There is the
safety of the other guests’ property to be considered.
Mademoiselle Martin, a young lady of nervous disposi¬
tion, is already frightened for her jewels. Monsieur Roux
calmed her, but he informed me that unless the thief is
discovered he will be forced to leave. Koche will be well
advised to treat the matter more seriously. Five thousand
francs!’—he requoted Monsieur Duclos’s version of my
loss—‘It is a serious thing.’

‘Yes, indeed! ’ said Frau Vogel.

‘You see! ’ put in Monsieur Duclos triumphantly, ‘the
nolice must be called in.’

‘With regard,’ pursued Herr Vogel in a whisper, ‘to
the question of your suspicions, Herr Vadassy, we feel
that at the moment the police should not be told of them.’

‘My suspicions?’ I glanced at Monsieur Duclos. He
had the grace to avoid my eye and fumble a little
ostentatiously with his pince-nez.

Herr Vogel smiled indulgently. ‘I understand perfecdy.
It would be better to say nothing that might be con¬
strued as referring to’—he looked round swiftly and
lowered his voice—‘a certain person of En glish nation-
ality, eh?’ He winked. ‘These affairs must be handled
with discretion, eh?’


149




‘Yes, yes! ’ echoed Frau Vogel cheerfully.

I mumbled something about having no suspicions at
all and made my escape. Monsieur Duclos was proving
a rather compromising publicity agent.

Koche was waiting for me in the office.

‘Ah, yes, Monsieur Vadassy, please come in.’ He shut
the door behind me. ‘A chair? Good. Now to business.’

I played my part. ‘I hope. Monsieur, that you have
satisfactory news for me. This suspense is most dis¬
tressing.’

He looked very grave.

‘I am very much afraid. Monsieur, that my inquiries
have yielded no result whatever.’

I frowned. ‘That is bad.’

‘Very bad. Very bad, indeed!’ He glanced at a paper
before him, tapped it once or twice with his forefinger
and looked up at me. ‘I have examined every member
of the staff, including the waiters and the gardener, hop¬
ing that one of them might, at any rate, be able to throw
some light on the affair.’ He paused. ‘Frankly, Monsieur,’
he went on quietly, ‘I feel that they are all telling me the
truth when they say that they have no knowledge of the
theft.’

‘You mean that it must have been one of the guests?’

He did not reply for a moment. I began, for no reason
that I could identify, to feel even more uneasy. Then he
shook his head slowly. ‘No, Monsieur, I do not mean
that it was one of the guests.’

‘Then someone from outside?’

‘Not that either.’

Then ...?’

He leaned forward. ‘I have decided, Monsieur, that this
is a case for the police.’


150




This was difficult. Beghin had made it clear that the
police were not to be called in.

‘But surely,’ I protested, ‘that is the last thing you
would wish to do. Think of the scandal.’

His lips tightened. This was a new Koche, no longer
easy-going and good natured, a very businesslike Koche.
There was, quite suddenly, an ugly tension in the
atmosphere.

‘Unfortunately,’ he said bitingly, ‘the damage is already
done. Not only are my guests aware of and discussing
the affair, but one of them is actually being regarded by
the others as a possible culprit.’

‘I am sorry to hear that, I—’

But he ignored my interruption. ‘I asked you. Mon¬
sieur, to remain silent until I could investigate this
matter. I find that, far from remaining silent, you have
discussed the affair with your fellow guests in the most
unfortunate manner.’

‘I asked the advice in confidence of Monsieur Duclos
relating to the question of informing the police. If Mon¬
sieur Duclos has been indiscreet, I am sorry.’

There was something very much like a sneer in his
voice as he answered. ‘And what, pray, was Monsieur
Duclos’s advice?’

‘He advised me to call in the police, but out of defer¬
ence to your—’

‘Then, Monsieur, we are in perfect agreement. You
have your opportunity.’ He reached for the telephone.
‘I will communicate with the police at once.’

‘One moment. Monsieur Koche!’ His hand paused on
the instrument. ‘I merely repeated Duclos’s advice. For
my part I see no necessity for calling in the police.’

To my intense relief he took his hand from the tele-

: T5i


phone. Then he turned slowly and looked me in the
eyes.

‘I thought you wouldn’t,’ he said deliberately.

‘I feel sure,’ I said, with all the amiability I could
muster, ‘that you will handle this affair far more efficiently
than the police. I do not wish to make a nuisance of
myself. If the stolen articles are returned, well and good.
If not—well—it cannot be helped. In any case, the police
will be more of a hindrance than a help.’

‘I believe you. Monsieur.’ This time there was no doubt
about the sneer. ‘I can quite believe that you would find
the police a very grave hindrance.’

‘I don’t think I understand you.’

‘No?’ He smiled grimly. ‘I have been in the hotel pro¬
fession for a number of years. Monsieur. You will not,
I feel sure, think me impolite if I tell you that I have
encountered gentlemen of your persuasion before. I have
learned to be careful. When you reported this alleged
theft you told me that you had lost a cigarette-case. Later,
when I suggested to you that you had described it as a
gold case, you hesitated and got out of your difficulties
by saying that it was both gold and silver. A little too
ingenious, my friend. When I went into your room I
noticed a blade of a pair of scissors lying on the floor by
the suitcase. On the bed was the rest of the scissors. You
looked at them twice, but did not comment on them.
Why? They had obviously been used to force the case.
They were important evidence. But you ignored them.
You saw nothing significant in them because you knew
how the case had been forced. You had forced it vour-
self.’

‘Preposterous! I—’

‘Again, you showed real concern when the camera was


152


mentioned. When I pointed it out to you on the rhair
your emotion was quite genuine. No doubt you were
afraid for the moment that something really had been
stolen.’

‘I—’

‘You made another mistake over the valuation of the
case. A case such as you described would be worth at
least fifteen hundred francs. True, you said it was a gift,
but even so you would scarcely undervalue it by fifty
per cent. People who have lost things invariably go to the
other extreme.’

‘I have never—’

‘The only thing that has puzzled me is your motive.
The usual idea is for the injured guest to threaten the
hotel with the police and the discomfiture of the other
guests unless he or, more often, she receives compensa¬
tion. It is well known that hotels are insured against such
contingencies. But you are either new to the g amp or you
have some other motive, for you told the guests immedi¬
ately. Perhaps you would like to tell me what your motive
really is.’

I had risen to my feet. I was genuinely angry now.

‘This is a monstrous accusation, Monsieur. I have never
been so insulted,’ I stammered with rage. ‘I... I shall ..

‘Call in the police?’ he put in solicitously. ‘Here is
the telephone.’

I put on as dignified a front as possible. ‘I have no
intention of prolonging this farce.’

‘You are wise.’ He tilted his chair. ‘I have had suspi¬
cions of you, Vadassy, since your rather lengthy inter¬
view with the police on Thursday. The French police do
not usually search a person’s room unless they have very
grave suspicions of him. The passport explanation was


153



a little thin. I can appreciate your anxiety to avoid further
encounters with the Commissaire. I am also in complete
agreement with you concerning the undesirability of pro¬
longing the present situation. I have, accordingly, made
out your bill. Please do not interpret this as an act of
mercy on my part. My own personal inclination is to hand
you straight over to the police; or at any rate to tell you
to clear out within an hour. My wife, however, is of the
opinion that either of those courses would arouse still
further comment among our guests. She is a more practical
person than I am. I bow to her decision. You will leave
the Reserve early tomorrow morning. Whether or not I
then inform the police depends on your behaviour during
the brief time you remain here. I shall expect you to
inform the other guests that your complaint was un¬
founded, that you had merely mislaid the articles and
that the damage to your suitcase was caused by your own
carelessness in using the wrong key and jamming the
locks. I have no doubt that you will be able to make your
story convincing enough for inexperienced ears. It is
understood?’

I did the best I could with the few shreds of self-
possession that were left to me. ‘I understand perfectly,
Monsieur. I had, in any case, no intention of staying here
after your fantastic impertinence.’

‘Good! Here is your bill.’

I studied the bill ostentatiously for mistakes. It was a
childish thing to do, but by this time I felt childish. He
waited in silence. There were no mistakes. I had only
just enough money. He took it with an air that told me
that he had not expected to be paid in full.

While he was making out the receipt I stared blankly
at an Istalia Cosulich Line sailing list pinned to the wall


154


beside me. I had read it through twice before he handed
me the receipted bill.

‘Thank you. Monsieur. I regret that I cannot hope that
we shall see you again at the Reserve.’

I went.

By the time I had got up to my room I was tremb ling
from head to foot. The discovery that the towels, the
fruit bowl, and every other portable object belonging to
the Reserve, with the sole exception of the bedclothes,
had been removed did not improve matters. I put my
head under the tap, drank some water, lit a cigarette, and
sat on the chair by the window.

I began to think of things I ought to have said to
Koche, cool, bitter things. Then, after a bit, I ceased to
tremble. This was Beghin’s fault, not mine. He might
have known that such a childish plot would fail. True
it was my carelessness, my inefficiency, that had brought
about its failure; but I was not used to behaving like a
common crook. A wave of righteous anger swept over
me. What right had Beghin to place me in such a despic¬
able position? If I had been an ordinary person with a
consul to defend my rights he would not have dared.
'Where was the sense in it, anyway? Or had it been his
idea that I should be found out? Was I a sort of guinea
being used for the purpose of some crazy experi¬
ment? Maybe I was. What did it matter, anyway? The
point was that unless Beghin liked to step in and exert
his authority I should be out of the Reserve in the morn¬
ing. What then? Presumably a cell at die Commissariat.
Perhaps I should telephone to Beghin now and explain
the situation..

But even as the thought crossed my mind I knew that
I could not do it. The truth was that I was afraid of him,


155


afraid that he might blame me for my discovery by 1
Koche. Above all, I was terrified of being taken back to
the Commissariat and locked up again in that small ugly
cell.

I looked out of the window. The sea lay like a great
sheet of rippled blue glass in the sun. It was infini ty v
peaceful. In its cool depths a man would have no more
fears, no doubts, no uncertainties. I could go down to the
beach and into the water and swim out beyond the bay
into the sea. I could go on swimming until my ar ms were
too tired to bring me back to the land. My strokes would
get slower, more laboured. Then I would stop and sink.

The water would rush into my lungs. I would struggle,
the desire for life would surge up—life at any price!—but
I would have made my preparations so that there would I
be no returning. There would be a moment or two of
torment, then I would slide gently into oblivion. And I
what then? A Yugoslav citizen named Joseph Vadassi
(they would misspell the name) got into difficulties while <
bathing yesterday at St Gatien. Attempts to rescue him
failed. His body has not yet been recovered. Nothing else?

No, nothing else. That was all. The body rotted.

My cigarette had gone out. I pitched it out of the
window, went over to the mirror in the wardrobe and
looked at myself. ‘You’re going to pieces,’ I murmured. A j
‘Better pull yourself together. Suicide one minute and
now you’re talking to yourself. Come on now. And don’t
be so damned hearty about it. It’s no good squaring your
shoulders like that. You’re not going in for a weight¬
lifting contest. Muscle’s no use to you. What you need
is a little intelligence. This business probably isn’t nearly
as serious as you think. And for goodness’ sake get this.

It’s about three o’clock. Between now and tonight you’ve


got to find a person here with a Contax camera. That’s
all. It isn’t difficult, is it? You’ve only got to look in their
rooms. Now start with this man Schimler. He’s the most
likely. He’s going under a false name. He says he’s a
Swiss when he’s really a German. He’s worried and
he’s got some understanding with Koche. You’ve got to
bear in mind, too, that Koche may be in on the secret.
Maybe that’s the real reason why he’s anxious to get
rid of you without calling in the police. Yes that’s an
idea, isn’t it? You’re not beaten yet. But be careful. Use
a little sense. You’ve been caught out once. Don’t let it
happen again. If he’s the man, you’ve got to be clever
to catch him. He’s dangerous. He’s the man who slugged
you on the head last night and gave you this damnable
headache. You know his room number. The girl gave
you that. Number fourteen, and it’s on the other side of
the house. But first find out where he is. You’ve got to
be careful! Now, get busy.’

I turned away from the mirror. Yes I must get busy. I
must know where Schimler was. He usually sat by him¬
self on the terrace. I would try there first.

I got to the lounge without meeting anyone and tip¬
toed over to the window. Yes there he was reading as
usual, his pipe in his mouth, his head bent forward over
the book in an attitude of concentration. For a moment I
watched him. It was a fine head. It didn’t seem possible
that this man could be a spy.

But this time I hardened my heart. Get busy! It
probably wouldn’t seem possible that anyone was a spy-—
until you knew for certain that he was. Anyway it was
my liberty or someone else’s. Schimler was undoubtedly a
suspicious character. Very well, then!

I went upstairs again. Outside my own room I paused.


157






Was there anything I wanted? A weapon? Nonsense!
this wasn’t going to be that sort of affair; just a quiet
examination of the room, that was all. My heart beating
furiously, I went on past my own room, along the pass¬
age. Then a new fear took hold of me. Supposing I met
someone! The Skeltons or the Vogels! How should I
explain my presence here? What was I supposed to be
doing? Then I passed a door labelled Salle de Bain. If
necessary I could go in there and pretend to be having a
bath. But I met nobody. A few moments later I was
outside room number fourteen.

Bridging the gulf between thought and action is often
a very arduous process. It is easy to contemplate search¬
ing someone’s room—standing before the mirror I had
had no qualms—but when it comes to the mechanics of
the business, the actual entry into the room, it is far from
easy. It is not merely the fear of discovery that deters.
It is the sense of privacy that is violated. There is a
strange door, a strange door-handle and, beyond it, part
of another person’s life. To open the door seems as in¬
excusable an intrusion as spying on a pair of lovers.

I stood there for a second or two fighting down this
sense of guilt, rationalising it into all sorts of minor objec¬
tions. Perhaps Mary Skelton had been mistaken; perhaps
this was the wrong room. It was too soon after lunch;
I should have given Schimler longer to settle down. It
was a waste of time; he would have hidden the camera.
The door might be locked and someone might come
along just as I was trying it. Someone might ...

There was only one way to deal with this. I would
make no attempt to go in stealthily. If the room were
occupied or anyone saw me, then I had made a mistake.
Monsieur Skelton had asked me to call in when I was





ready to bathe. The wrong room? I was sorry. I would
retire. That was unless it was one of the Skeltons who
saw me. But if I stood outside here much longer I should
be seen, anyhow. Drawing a deep breath, I rapped on
the door, grasped the handle and turned it. The door was
unlocked. Still standing on the threshold, I pushed it and
let it swing open. The room was empty. I waited a
second, then walked in and shut the door behind me. The
deed was done.

I glanced round. The room was smaller than mine and
looked out over the outhouse containing the kitchens. A
clump of young cypresses near the window shut out a
good deal of light. Keeping as far away from the window
as possible, I looked for Schimler’s suitcase. It did not
take me long to establish the fact that there wasn’t one.
Perhaps he had transferred the contents to the chest of
drawers and had the case taken to the storeroom. I tried
the drawers. All with the exception of the top one were
empty. The top drawer contained a white and very much
laundered shirt, a grey tie, a small pocket-comb, a pair
of socks with large holes in the heels, a set of cl ean but
crumpled underclothes, a packet of soap flakes and a tin
of French tobacco. There was no camera. I looked at the
label on the tie. It bore the name and address of a Berlin
manufacturer. The underclothes were of Czechoslovakian
origin. The shirt was French. I went over to the wash¬
basin. The razor, shaving soap, toothbrush and paste were
also French. I turned to the cupboard.

It was wide and deep, with a row of coat-hangers on
a brass rail and a rack for shoes. There was one suit
and a black raincoat in it. Nothing else. The suit was
dark grey and threadbare at the elbows. The raincoat had
a triangular tear near the bottom.


159




This, then, with the contents of the drawer, was ‘Herr
Heinberger’s’ wardrobe. Very odd! If the man had suffi¬
cient money to stop at the Reserve surely he would have
more clothes than this?

That, however, was beside the point. I was looking
for a camera. I felt under the mattress but this yielded
nothing but a scratch on the hand from a projecting
spring end. The room had begun to get on my nerves.
I had failed to find what I had come for. It was fiW i
went. There was, however just one more thing that I
wanted to do.

I went back to the cupboard took the suit down and
looked in the pockets. The first two I felt were empty;
but in the breast pocket my fingers encountered what
felt like a thin paper-covered book. I pulled it out. It
was not one book, but two, and both were passports—
one German and one Czech.

I examined the German one first. It had been issued
in 1931 to Emil Schimler journalist, born in Essen in
,1899. This was in itself surprising. I had assessed
Schimler at well over forty. I turned to the visa pages.
Most of them were blank. There were, however, two
visas for France dated 1931 and a set of Soviet visas
dated 1932. He had spent two months in Soviet Russia.
There was also a Swiss visa for the previous December
and a French one for May of that year. I turned to the
Czech passport.

It contained an unmistakable photograph of Schimler,
but was issued jm the name of Paul Czissar, commer¬
cial representative, bom in Brno in 1895. The date of
issue was August 10, 1934* It contained a large number
of German and Czech visa stamps. Herr Czissar seemed
to have travelled extensively on the Berlin-Prague line.


160



After a little trouble I managed to decipher the most
recent date stamp. It was for January 20 of the current
year—just about eight months ago.

I was so engrossed with these significant discoveries
that I did not hear the footsteps until they were practic¬
ally outside the door. Even if I had have heard them I
doubt whether I should have been able to do anything
more. As it was, I just had time to cram the passport back
into the pocket and bundle the suit into the cupboard
behind me before the handle of the door turned.

Iti the few split seconds that followed, my brain and
body seemed to go numb. I stood and gaped stupidly at
the handle. I wanted to shout, hide in the cupboard, j ump
out of the window, scramble under the bed. But I did
none of those things. I just gaped.

Then the door swung open and Schimler r amp into
the room.




ts

He did not see me for a moment.

As he came through the doorway he tossed a book
on the bed and made as if to cross to the chest of
drawers.

Then our eyes .met.

I saw him start.'Then very slowly, he went on to the
chest of drawers and took out the tin of tobacco. He started
filling his pipe.

The silence was almost unbearable. A weight seemed
to be pressing on my chest, stifling me. The blood was
thumping in my head. Fascinated," I watched his fingers
steadily pressing The tobacco into the bowl.

When at last he spoke,''-his voice was perfectly level,
even casual. \ \

‘I’m afraid you will find nothing of value here.’

‘I didn’t—’ I began huskily; but, pipe in hand he
motioned me into silence. \

‘Spare me your protestations. Believe me you have my
symga^iy^-Persons in your profession must of’-necessity
take risks. It must be very galling to find that you have
taken them for nothing. Especially’, he added coinmenc-
ing to light the pipe ‘when the risk lancfe- you in prison’-.
He blew out a cloud of smoke. ‘Now, would yob prefer
to see the manager here or in his office?’

‘I do not wish to see the manager at all. I have taken
nothing.’


‘I am aware of that. There is nothing to take. But I
must remind you that you are in my room, uninvited.’

My scattered wits were returning.

‘As a matter of fact—’ I began again but before I could
get any further he had interrupted me.

‘Ah! I was waiting for that. I find that when a person
prefaces a statement with “as a matter of fact,” the state¬
ment is nearly always a lie. But do go on. What is your
fact?’

I flushed angrily.

The fact is that earlier today some valuables were
stolen from my suitcase. I suspected you of taking them.
As Monsieur Koche did not take the matter seriously I
decided to see for myself.’

He smiled acidly. ‘Oh, I see. The best defence is attack.
I threaten you, you threaten me. Unfortunately for you,
I happen to have discussed with Herr Koche the subject
of your complaint’ He paused significandy. ‘Your bill
is paid, I believe.’

‘I am leaving under protest.’

‘And is this part of your protest?’

‘Put it that way if you wish. However, I see that 1
was mistaken. You are not the culprit. I can only apologise
to you profoundly for taking the law into my own hands,
and withdraw.’ I made a move towards the door.

He moved over slighdy to intercept me.

‘I am afraid,’ he said gravely, ‘that that will not do.
Under the circumstances I think it would be as well if
we were to stay here and ask Herr Koche to come to us.’
He went to the bell and rang it. My heart sank.

‘I have taken nothing. I have done no damage. You
cannot charge me with anything.’ My voice rose.

‘My dear Herr Vadassy,’ he said wearily, ‘you are al-



ready known to the police. That is sufficient. If it amuses
you to quibble, do so. But, please save it for the Com-
missaire. You came here with the intention of ste aling
You can make such explanations as you can think of to
the detectives.’

I was desperate. I cast round wildly for a way out. If
Koche came now I should be in the Commissariat within
half an hour. I had only one thing left to say. I said it.

‘And who’ I snapped, ‘is going to lodge the complaint?
Herr Heinberger, Herr Emil Schimler of Berlin or Herr
Paul Czissar of Brno?’

I had expected some reaction from this, but the extent
of it took me by surprise. He turned round slowly and
faced me. His hollow cheeks had gone deathly pale and
the ironic expression in his eyes had changed to one of
cold hatred. He walked towards me. Involuntarily, I took
a step backwards. He stopped.

‘So you are not the hotel sneak-thief after all.’

It was said softly, almost wonderingly, yet with a cor¬
rosive quality about it that scared me badly.

‘I told you I wasn’t a thief,’ I said jauntily.

He stepped forward suddenly, gripped the front of my
shirt, and pulled me towards him until my face was a
few centimetres from his. I was so startled that I forgot
to resist him. He shook me slowly backwards and forwards
as he spoke.

No, not a thief, not an honest rat, but a filthy litde
spy. A cunning spy, too.’ His lip curled contemptu¬
ously. ‘To the outside world a shy, ingenuous teacher of
languages with a romantic appearance and sad Magyar
eyes that would deceive a painter. How long have you
been at the game, Vadassy, or whatever your name is?
Did they pick you for the job or did you graduate from

164



the flogging cells? He gave me a violent push that sent
me staggering back to the wall.

His fist was clenched and he was coming towards me
again when there was a knock at the door.

For a moment we stared at each other in silence; then
he straightened his back, walked to the door and opened
it. It was one of the waiters.

‘You rang, Monsieur?’ I heard him say.

Schimler seemed to hesitate. Then:

I am sorry,’ he said; ‘I did not mean to ring. You can
go.’

He shut the door and, leaning against it, looked at me.
‘That was a fortunate interruption for you, my friend .
It is many years since I lost my temper so completely.
I was going to kill you.’

I strove to keep the tremor out of my voice. ‘And now
that you have regained your temper, perhaps we can
talk sense. A little while ago you remarked that the best
defence is attack. I am afraid that your calling me a spy is
a somewhat naive way of putting that notion into practice.
Don’t you agree?’

He was silent. I began to regain my self-possession.
This was going to be easier than I had thought. The
main thing now was to find out what he had done with
the camera. Then I would get the waiter back to tele¬
phone Beghin.

‘If,’ I went on, ‘you knew the trouble you had caused
me you would be far more sympathetic. I can still feel
that crack on the head you gave me last ni ght And if
you haven’t already spoiled those two rolls of film I should
like them back before the police come. You know, they
talked of not letting me go back to Paris until the matter
was cleared up. However, now that it is cleared up, I

165



hope you are going to be sensible. By the way, what
did you do with the camera?’

He was frowning at me uncertainly. ‘If this is some
sort of trick ...’ he began, and paused. ‘I haven’t the
least idea what you are talking about,’ he concluded.

I shrugged. ‘You’re being very foolish. Have you ever
heard of a man named Beghin?’

He shook his head.

‘I am afraid you soon will. He is a member of the
Surete Generate attached to the Naval Intelligence
Department at Toulon. Does that suggest nothing to
you?’

He came slowly to the middle of the room. I pre¬
pared to defend myself. Out of the corner of my eye I
could see the bell-push. A couple of strides and I should
be able to reach it. The next time he moved I would
make a dash. But he stood still.

‘I have a suspicion, Vadassy, that we are talking at
cross purposes.’

I smiled. ‘I don’t think so.’

‘Then I am afraid I do not understand you.’

I sighed impatiently. ‘Is it really worth denying? Be
sensible, please. What have you done with the camera?’

‘Is this some sort of joke?’

‘It is not, as you will soon find out.’ Feeling that I
was not handling the situation particularly well, I began
to get annoyed. ‘I propose to call the police. Have you
any objections?’

‘To the police? None at all. Call them by all means.’

He might be bluffing, but I felt a little uneasy. With¬
out the evidence of the camera I was helpless. I decided
to change my tactics. For a second or two I stared hard
at him, then I broke into a crestfallen grin. ‘Do you


166



know,’ I said sheepishly, ‘I have an unhappy suspicion
that I have made a mistake.’

His eyes searched mine warily. ‘I feel quite sure that
is the case.’

I sighed. ‘Well, I am very sorry to have caused you all
this inconvenience. I feel extremely foolish. Monsieur
Duclos will be most amused.’

‘Who?’ The question was like a pistol shot.

‘Monsieur Duclos. He is a pleasant old man. a little
talkative, it is true, but sympathetic.’

I saw him control himself with an effort. He ramp
nearer to me. His voice was dangerously calm ‘Who are
you and what do you want? Are you from the police?’

‘I am connected with the police.’ This, I thought, was
rather neat. ‘You know my name. All I want is a piece of
information. What have you done with that camera?’

‘And if I still tell you that I don’t know what you’re
talking about?’

‘I shall hand you over for interrogation. What is
more’ I watched him narrowly—‘I shall make known
what you seem so anxious to keep quiet—the fact th at
your name is not Heinberger.’

‘The police already know it.’

‘I know that. I regret to say that I have no confidence
whatever in the intelligence of the local police. Now do
you know what I am talking about?’

‘No.’

I smiled and went to pass him to go to the door. He
gripped my arm and swung me round.

‘Listen, you fool,’ he said savagely, ‘I don’t know what’s
the matter with you, but you seem to have got some
idea into your head about me. Whatever it is, you seem
to regard the fact that l am anxious to conceal my identity

■ Ik.

167


as some sort of proof that your idea is correct. Is that
right?’

‘Approximately.’

‘Very well, then. My reasons for using the name Hein-
berger have nothing whatever to do with you. Koche is
aware of them. The police have my correct name. You,
who have no idea what those reasons are, propose to be
wilfully indiscreet unless I give you some information
which I do not possess. Is that correct, too?’

‘More or less. Assuming, of course, that you haven’t
got the information.’

He ignored this last remark and sat down on the edge
of his bed. ‘I don’t know how you found out. The police
here told you, I suppose, and those passports in the ward¬
robe. In any case, I’ve got to stop the news getting any
further. I am being perfectly frank with you, you see! I
must stop you. The only way I can hope to do that is
to give you my reasons. There is nothing very strange
about them. My case is by no means unique.’

He paused to relight his pipe. His eyes met mine across
the bowl. The ironic expression had returned to them.
‘You look, Vadassy, as though you weren’t going to
believe a word of anything.’

‘I don’t know that I am.’

He blew the match out. ‘Well, we’ll see. But you must
remember one thing; I am trusting you. I have, of course,
no alternative but to do so. I cannot persuade you to
trust me.’

There was a hint of a question in the pause that fol¬
lowed the remark. For one fleeting instant I weakened;
but only for an instant.

‘I am trusting nobody.’

He sighed. ‘Very well. The explanation begins in 1933.

168



I was editor of a social-democrat newspaper in Berlin,
the Telegrafblatt: He shrugged. ‘It is no longer in exist¬
ence. It was not a bad paper. I had some clever men
working for me. It was the property of a sawmill owner in
East Prussia. He was a good man, a reformer, with a
profound a dmir ation for the nineteenth-century English
liberals, Godwin and John Stuart Mill, people like that.
He went into mourning when Stresemann died. He used
sometimes to send me down leading articles about the
brotherhood of man and the necessity of replacing the
struggle between capital and labour with co-operation
based on Christ’s teaching. I must say he was on the best
of terms with his own employees; but I have an idea that
his mills were losing money. Then came the deluge.

‘The trouble with postwar German social-democracy
was that it supported with one hand what it was trying
to fight with the other. It believed in the freedom of the
individual capitalist to exploit the worker and the freedom
of the worker to organise his trade union and fight the
capitalist. Its great illusion was its belief in the limitless
possibilities of compromise. It thought that it could build
Utopia within the Constitution of Weimar, that the only
sublime political conception was reform, that the rotten
economic structure of the world could be shored up at
the bottom with material from the top. Worst of all, it
thought that you could meet force with good will, that
the way to deal with a mad dog was to stroke it. In 1933
German social-democracy was bitten and died in agony.

‘The Telegrafblatt was one of the first papers to be
closed down. Twice we were raided. The second tun**
the machine-room was wrecked with hand grenades.
Even that we survived. We were lucky enough to find a
printer who could and would print a newspaper of sorts

169




for us. But three weeks later he refused to print any
more papers for us. He had been visited by the police.
The same day we had a telegram from the owner saying
that owing to losses in his business he had been com¬
pelled to sell the paper. The purchaser was a Nazi
official, and I happen to know that the price was paid
with a draft on a Detroit bank. The following night I was
arrested at my home and put in the police cells.

‘They kept me there for three months. I was not
charged. They did not even question me. All I could get
out of them was that my case was being considered. The
first month, while I was getting used to it, was the worst
part. Those police weren’t bad fellows. One of them even
told me that he had sometimes read my stuff. But at the
end of the three months I was moved to a concentration
camp near Hanover.’

He paused for a moment.

‘I dare say you’ve heard a lot about concentration
camps,’ he went on. ‘Most people have; and their ideas
are mostly wrong. To hear some talk you would ima gine
that the entire day was spent in knocking the prisoners’
teeth out with rubber truncheons, kicking them in their
stomachs and breaking their fingers with rifle butts. It
isn’t; at least it wasn’t in the camp I was in. Nazi brutality
is much'less human. It’s the mind they get at. If you’d
ever seen a man come out of a fortnight’s solitary con¬
finement in a pitch-dark cell you’d know what I mean.
Theoretically, it is possible to pass the time in a con¬
centration camp no more uncomfortably than in any other
prison—theoretically. No one, I should think, has ever
done so. The discipline is fantastic. They give you work
to do—shovelling piles of stones from one spot to another
and then back again—and if you stop working, even to




straighten your back for an instant—you get a flogging for
disobeying orders and a week’s solitary confinement. They
never relax for a moment. They change the guards con¬
stantly so that they don’t get tired of watching. They
march you about the camp under cover of a machine-gun.
They feed you on offal and cabbage stumps stewed in
water and there’s a machine-gun covering you while you
eat the filth. One man there used to be so worried by
the gun that as soon as he’d eaten he used %vomit. Some
became so debilitated that they couldn’t stand. When you
were new to it you fought against it. They were ready
for that. They used to get to work systematically to break
your spirit. Regular floggings and long spells of solitary
confinement soon did the trick. As long as you held out
you were conscious that very gradually your mind was
going. I pretended to knuckle under. It wasn’t easy. You
see, they can tell by your eyes. If you let them see
you looking at them, let them see that your mind is still
working like a human being’s instead of a beast’s, you’re
done for. You keep your eyes on the ground, never
look at the guard who addresses you. I became quite
expert; so expert that I began to think that I might be
deceiving myself and that I was really no better off
than the rest. I spent two years in that camp.’

His pipe had gone out. He tapped the bowl reflectively
against the palm of his hand.

‘One day I was taken to the commandant’s office. They
told me that if I would sign a paper renouncing my
German citizenship, saying that I would leave Germany
and would not return, I would be allowed to go. At first
I thought it was merely another of their tricks for making
you give yourself away. But it was no trick. Not even
their People’s Court could find anything to convict me




of. I signed the paper. I would have signed anything to
get out. Then I had to wait for three days for my permit
to arrive. During that time they kept me away from the
other prisoners. Instead of working with them I was put
on to cleaning latrines. But at night we went to the sam^
dormitory. And then something curious happened.

‘Talking between the prisoners was forbidden, and the
rule was enforced so savagely that the eyes-on-the-ground
idea applied as much between prisoner and prisoner as
between prisoner and guard. If you looked at another
prisoner they might say you had been thinking of talkin g.
The result was that you recognised the man next to you
not so much by his face as by his shoulders and the
shape of his feet. I had a shock when, as we were being
marched into the dormitory on my last night there, I saw
that the man next to me was trying to catch my eye. He
was a grey-faced, heavy sort of man of about forty. He’d
only been there six months, and by the way they’d
singled him out for floggings I had guessed that he was
a Communist. There was a guard near us and I was
frankly terrified of giving them an excuse to cancel my
permit. I got into my bunk as quickly as I could and
lay still.

‘It used to be quite common for the prisoners to have
nightmares. Sometimes they would just mumble, some¬
times they would shout and scream in their sleep. As
soon as a man started one of the guards would get a
bucket of water and empty it over him. I never slept
much there, but that night I didn’t sleep at all. I kept
thinking of getting away the next day. I had been lying
in the darkness for about two hours when this man next
to me started to mumble in his sleep. One of the guards
came over and looked at him, but the mumbling had


ceased. When the guard moved away it started a gain but
now it was a little louder and I could hear what he was
saying. He was asking if I were awake.

1 coughed a little, turned restlessly, and sighed so
that he should know that I was. Then he began to mumble
again, and I heard him telling me to go to an address in
Prague. He only had time to say it once, for the guard
had come over again and he was suspicious. The man
turned over suddenly and began flinging his arms about
wildly and shouting for help. The guard kicked him and,
as the man pretended to wake up, threatened him with
a bucket of water if he wasn’t quiet. I heard no more
from him. The following day I was given my permit and
put on a train for Belgium.

C I won’t attempt to tell you what it felt like to be free
again. It worried me' at first. I couldn’t get the smell of
camp out of my nostrils and I used to go off to sleep at
all sorts of odd times during the day and dream that I
was back there. But I got over that after a bit and began
to think like a human being again. I spent a month or
two in Paris doing a little work for the newspapers there,
but the language difficulty made it almost impossible. I
had to pay to have my stuff properly translated. I decided
finally to try Prague. At the time I had no intention of
going to the address that had been given me. I had,
indeed, almost forgotten about it. Then something I
heard from another German I met in Prague made me
decide to investigate. That address turned out to be the
propaganda organisation.’

He paused for a moment to relight his pipe. Then he
went on.

‘After a while, when they were sure of me, I started
working for the underground. The principal activity was


getting news into Germany, real news. We produced a
newspaper—the name of it doesn’t matter—and it used
to be smuggled in small quantities over the frontier. It
was printed on a very thin India paper and each one
folded into a thin wad that a man could carry in the palm
of his hand. Many different methods were employed for
the smuggling, some of them very ingenious. The copies
were even packed in small greaseproof bags and stuffed
inside the axle boxes of the Prague-Berlin trains. They
were collected by a wheel-tester at the Berlin end, but the
Gestapo caught him after a while, and we had to think of
something else. Then it was suggested that one of us
should make an effort to get a Czech passport, pose as a
commercial traveller and take the papers in with samples.
I volunteered for the job, and after some trouble we were
successful.

‘I crossed into Germany over thirty times that year.
It wasn’t particularly risky. There were only two dangers.
One was the chance of being recognised and denounced.
The other was that the man who took the papers off me
to pass them on to the distributing organisation might
become suspect. He did become suspect. They didn’t
arrest him immediately, but watched. We used to meet
in the waiting-room of a suburban station and then get
into a train together. I would leave the parcel of paper
on the luggage rack when I got out. He would pick it up.
Then one day, just after the train had left the station,
it stopped and a squad of S.S. men got in from the
track. We didn’t know for certain whether it was us they
were after or not, so we went into separate compartments
and sat still. I heard them arrest him and waited for my
turn. But they just examined my passport and went on
through the train. It was not until I was nearly back in


174





Prague the next day that. I realised that I was being
followed. Luckily I had the sense not to go back to head¬
quarters. Luckily, that is, for my friends. It was less
lucky for me. When they found that I wasn’t going to
lead them to the persons they wanted they decided that
the best way would be to get me back to Germany and
use their persuasive resources to extract information. You
see, our newspaper had begun to worry them, and I
was the only real clue they had to the people behind it.
The German end of the organisation was concerned purely
with distribution. It was the directing brains that they
were after. I had to get away. And it had to be out of
Czechoslovakia, too, for they had notified the Czech police
that I was really a German criminal wanted for theft and
that. the Paul Czissar passport had been obtained under
false pretences.

‘In Switzerland they tried to kidnap me. I was staying
on the shore of Lake Constance and got friendly with
two men who said they were on a fishing holiday. One
day they asked me to go out with them. I was bored. I
said that I would go. Just in time and quite by accident
I found out that they were Germans, not Swiss, and that
their boat had been hired on the German side of the
lake. I went to Zurich after that; I knew they would keep
track of me, but they couldn’t do any kidnapping so far
away from the frontier. But I didn’t stay there long. One
morning I got a letter from Prague warning me that the
Gestapo had somehow found out that my name was
Schimler. They had known before, of course, that Paul
Czissar was no Czech, but a German; but now that they
knew my real name they would not have to kidnap me
to get me back to Germany. I’ve been on the run ever
since. Twice they’ve nearly caught up with me. Switzer-



land was swarming with Gestapo agents. I d«ided to ny
Fnmce- The people in Prague sent me to Koche. Hes

“‘Hrt’tar “ casing friend. I arrived here without

a Je^y, and he’s given me clothes and kept me for
a penny5 more. I have no

nothing nTany, for he has none

money and Koche cant give ^ <nj,

, • That wife of his owns the place, and it s all he

f' Jnersrde her to let me stay. I offered to work,
but she wouldn’t have that. She’s jealous of him and likes
m have a hold over him. I should get away. It s dangerous
h „7 now A few weeks back we heard that a Gestapo
he ? : „ ent wo France. It’s amazing the way

they 1 ferret things out. When you are being hunted you

^ to feel when there s

£*£ I’ve managed to change my W'Tf * :
deal but I think I have been identified. I think, too, that
I have spotted the agent they sent. But he won t act until
L’s sure My only chance is to bluff him. You took me

oS F” * 1 th °“ 8bt 1 1 ” d TVe

mistake Koche had put you down as a petty crook. He
2 g£d *1 don’t know what you are, Vadassy, but what
I’ve told you is the truth. What are you going to do?

IV I Sed at hhn. ’Frankly, I «
miakt have beheved this story except for one thing. Yo
3£ dae fact of dreir fading on. that y»

name wi Schimlcr should make your positron vmy much
worse If they couldn’t force you to return when they
taw you as Czissar, why should they be able to do so
when they had found your real name? ^ _

His eyes were on mine; I saw the corn f rs ^ s “ *
twitch. It was the only hint of emotion he had betrayed.
His voice when he replied was flat and toneless.

riG





'It is very simple/ he said slowly, £ my wife and child
are still in Germany . 5

'You see/ he went on after a bit, ‘when they expelled
me from Germany they would not let me see my family.
I had not seen them for over two years. Before I was
sent to the camp I had heard that my wife had taken
the boy to her father’s house outside Berlin. I wrote to
her from Belgium and Paris, and we arranged that as
soon as I could establish myself in France or England they
would join me. But I soon saw that it was all I could
do to support myself in Paris. London would have
been the same. I was just another German refugee. In
Prague I met a man who told me that the Communists
had ways and means of getting in and out of Germany
undetected. I craved desperately to see my wife, to talk
to her, to see the boy. It was that craving that sent me
to the address I had been given in the camp. The story
about getting in and out of Germany was nonsense, of
course. I soon saw that; but when an opportunity did
come I took it. On three of my trips with the Czech
passport I met my wife in secret. ■

‘She tried to persuade me to take her and the child to
Prague with me, but I wouldn’t. I was living on practic¬
ally nothing, and while they could live in comfort with
her father and the boy could go to school I thought it
was best that they should do so.

‘When the first blow fell I was glad that I had been
so sensible. Let the Gestapo get me back if they could!
Not, mind you, that it would have done them any good,
because the Party knew that no matter how loyal a man
was he might eventually be tortured into speaking. When
I was followed to Prague the headquarters was moved.
I don’t know where they are now. Their address is Poste


Restante, Prague. But the Gestapo are very thorough.
They wanted me back. And I underestimated them. My
Czech passport was too dangerous to use, so I fell back
on the old German passport that my wife had kept hidden
safely and brought to me when we met. It must have been
through my using it that they traced me.

‘When I heard, I was terrified. In my wife and son
they had hostages. I would have to return or know that
my wife was imprisoned in my stead. I thought things
over. Until they delivered their ultimatum she would
probably be safe—under surveillance, no doubt, but safe.
There was only one thing for me to do—go into hiding
until I could get news of her. If she were all right and
still with her father, I would stay in hidic until perhaps
they had grown tired of looking for me, and I could get
another passport with which to get her away.’

He stared at the old pile in his hand. ‘I’ve waited over
four months now, and I’ve heard nothing. I can’t write
myself for fear of the German censors. Koche has an
accommodation address in Toulon, and he has tried to
get letters through. But there has been no reply. I can
do nothing but wait. If they find me here I cannot help
it. Unless I hear from her very soon I must in any case
go back. That is all there is for me to do.’

For a moment there was silence. Then he looked up
at me and grinned very faintly. ‘Can I trust you, Vadassy? ’

‘Of course.’ I wanted to say more, but I could not.

He nodded his thanks. I got up and walked to the
door.

‘And what about your spy, my friend?’ he murmured
over his shoulder. ■

I hesitated. Then: ‘I shall look for him elsewhere, Herr
Heinberger.’


As I pulled the door to behind me I saw him slowly
raise his hands to his face. I went quickly.

As I did so I heard another door close near at hand.
I paid no attention to it, I had no reason to fear being
seen leaving Herr Heinberger’s room. Back in my own
room, I took out Beghin’s list and looked at it for a
moment. Then I crossed off three names—Albert Koche,
Suzanne Koche and E mil Schimler.


.179


14

At half past four on the afternoon of August the 18th
I sat down with a sheet of hotel paper in front of me
to solve a problem.

For a long time I stared at the blank paper. Then
I held it up to read die watermark. At last I wrote on it,
very slowly and clearly, this sentence:

‘If it takes one man three days to eliminate three
suspects, how long, other factors remaining constant, will
it take the same man to eliminate eight more suspects?’

I considered this for a bit. Then I wrote below it:
‘Answer: eight days,’ and underlined it.

After that I drew a gallows with a corpse suspended
from it. The corpse I labelled ‘spy.’ Then I added a fat
stomach to it, pencilled in large globules of sweat, and
altered the label to ‘beghin.’ Last of all I deleted the
stomach, added a lot of hair and semicircles under the
eyes and rechristened it ‘vadassy.’ I made a halfhearted
attempt to sketch in the hangman.

Eight days! And I had less than eight hours! Unless,
of course, Koche allowed me to stay after all. Schimler
was his friend, and if Schimler told him that I was not a
crook ... But did Schimler really know that I was not a
crook? Perhaps I ought to go back to his room and ex¬
plain. Though what was the use? I had practically no
money left. I could not afford to stay any longer in the
Reserve even if I were allowed to. That was another con-

180


tingency that Beghin had omitted to provide for.
Beghin! The man’s incompetence and stupidity were
monumental.

By the time I had destroyed the sheet of paper on
which I had been scribbling and taken another, it was
five o’clock. I looked out of the window. The sun had
moved round so that now the sea looked like a shimmer¬
ing pool of liquid metal. The sides of the hill s across the
bay glowed redly above their fringe of trees. A shadow
had begun to move across the beach.

It would be good now, I thought, to be in Paris. The
afternoon city heat would have gone. It would be good to
sit under the trees in the Luxembourg, the trees near the
mar ionette theatre. It would be quiet there now. There
would be no one there but a student or two reading.
There you could listen to the rustle of leaves unconscious
of the pains of humanity in labour, of a civilisation
hastening to destruction. There, away from this brassy
sea Mid blood-red earth, you could contemplate the
twentieth-century tragedy unmoved; unmoved except by
pity for mankind fighting to save itself from the primeval
ooze that welled from its own unconscious being.

But this was St Gatien, not Paris; the Reserve, not the
Luxembourg Gardens; and I was an actor, not an on¬
looker. What was more, I should shortly become, unless
I were very clever or very lucky, no more than a ‘noise
off/ I came back to business.

The Skeltons, the Vogels, Roux and Martin, the
Clandon-Hartleys, and Duclos—I stared at the list miser¬
ably. The Skeltons, now! What did I know about them?
Nothing, except that their parents were due to arrive
the following week on the Conte di Savoia. That and the
fact that this was their first trip abroad together. They

181


could be eliminated straight away, of course. Then I
paused. Why ‘of course’? Was this the calm, dispassionate
examination of all the available facts? No, it wasn’t. I
knew nothing of the Skeltons except what they had told
me. Perhaps, for that matter, I had eliminated Schimler
and Koche a little too readily. But then there were his
passports and the conversation I had overheard between
him and Koche to confirm what he had said. The Skeltons,
however, had nothing to confirm their story. They must
be investigated.

The Vogels? The temptation was to elimina te them
also. No spy could be so grotesquely unlike a spy as Vogel.
But they, too, must be questioned discreetly.

Roux and Martin? Except that Roux talked rather ugly
French and that the woman was excessively affectionate
there was nothing to single them out for special attention.
To be investigated, nevertheless.

The Clandon-Hartleys looked more interesting I knew
a good deal about them. All of it was unconfirmed, of
course, but it was interesting. And there was one very
suggestive point. The Major was short of money. He had
twice tried to borrow. Moreover, according to Duclos, he
had been expecting money that had not arrived. Payment
for the photographs? It was a distinct possibility. The
Major, Duclos had insisted, was desperate. Well, that was
possible, too. And Mrs Clandon-Hartley was an Italian.
It all fitted together very nicely.

Old Duclos, however, was by no means a reliable
witness. His imagination was, as I knew only too well,
extremely fertile. He himself could scarcely be classed as
a suspect. He was too unlikely. But then they were all
unlikely. What did I know about Duclos? Simply that he
was, or appeared to be, a petty industrialist with a pen-


182


chant for gossiping and cheating at friendly games. Where
did that get me? Nowhere.

And then I made what I conceived to be a great dis¬
covery. Anyone but a hopeless nincompoop would have
made it before. I decided that it was no use studying these
persons’ normal behaviour—nothing was easier than to
play a part while everyone accepted you at your face
value—the thing to do was to proceed on the assumption
that every one of them was a liar and force them all into
the open. I should not be friendly with them. I should
quarrel. I should not calmly accept their own estimates of
themselves, but question and analyse. I had been begging the
whole question. It was time I adopted an aggressive policy.

But how did one carry out an aggressive policy in such
circumstances? Was I to roam the grounds of the Reserve
like a hungry mastiff snapping viciously at all who crossed
my path? No, the thing to do was to question, to be
inquisitive; and then, when the bounds of co mm on polite¬
ness were reached, I must overstep them. I must blunder
amiably but inexorably over people’s feelings until they
betrayed themselves. Then, I promised myself, I would
swoop like a hawk on the guilty wretch.

At twenty-five past five I wrote the nine names down
on my piece of paper, shut my eyes, moved my pencil in
a circle and—-stabbed. Then I opened my eyes and saw
that the Vogels were to be my first victims. I combed my
hair and descended in search of them.

They were, as usual, on the beach together with Duclos,
the Skeltons, and the French pair. As I appeared Mon¬
sieur Duclos sprang from his deck-chair and hurried to
meet me. Too late, I remembered that I had neglected
to provide myself with a reasonable explanation for the
recovery of the ‘stolen’ property.

183



I almost turned and ran. Then, as I was hesitating., I
saw that it was too late for flight. Duclos was bearing
down on me. I attempted to pass him with a genial nod,
but he executed a swift outflanking movement and I found
myself walking side by side with him towards the others.

‘We expected to hear before,’ he said breathlessly. ‘The
police have been called in?’

I shook my head. ‘No. Fortunately they were not
necessary.’

‘The valuables have been found?’

‘Yes.’

He ran on ahead to announce the fact. ‘The thief,’ I
heard him saying, ‘has been found. The missing valuables
have been returned.’

As I came up they clustered round me excitedly, asking
questions.

‘Was it one of the servants?’

‘The English major, without a doubt...’

‘The gardener?’

‘The headwaiter?’

‘Please!’ I held up a repressive hand. ‘There is no
question of a guilty person. The valuables were not stolen.’

There was a gasp.

‘The whole thing,’ I said with uneasy gaiety, ‘was a
mistake ... a rather stupid mistake. It appears’—I racked
my brain desperately for a way out of the difficulty—‘it
appears that the box was pushed out of sight under the
bed when the room was cleaned.’ It sounded inexpres¬
sibly feeble.

Roux pushed his way between the Vogels. ‘Then
how,’ he demanded triumphantly, ‘does it come about that
the locks on the suitcase were broken open?’

‘Ah, yes,’said Herr Vogel.

184





‘Yes, indeed! ’ echoed his wife.

‘What does he say?’ said Skelton.

To gain time I translated. ‘I don’t,’ I added, ‘know
what he’s talking about.’

He looked puzzled. ‘Weren’t the locks of your case
burst open? I thought you said they were.’

I shook my head slowly. I had an idea.

Roux had been listening to this exchange with puzzled
impatience. I turned to him.

‘I was explaining, Monsieur, that you were under a
misapprehension. I don’t know where you gained your
information, but there was certainly no question of the
locks of my case being forced. I did discuss the matter,
in confidence, with Monsieur Duclos here, but nothing
was said of locks. ‘If,’ I went on severely, ‘false rumours
have been circulated by some person unaware of the true
facts, a most unfortunate situation will have been created.
Was it your impression, Herr Vogel, that the locks had
been forced?’

Vogel shook his head hastily.

‘No, indeed! ’ added Frau Vogel.

‘Monsieur Roux,’ I pursued heavily, ‘I take it that
you ...’ But he interrupted me.

‘What is this nonsense?’ he demanded irritably. ‘It was
the old one there’—he pointed to Duclos—‘who told us
all.’

Eyes turned on Monsieur Duclos. He drew himself
up. ‘I, Messieurs,’ he said, sternly, ‘am a businessman
of long experience. I am not in the habit of betraying
confidences.’

Roux laughed loudly and unpleasantly. ‘Do you deny
that you told Vogel and myself of the theft and that you
stated that the locks were forced?’


185



‘In confidence. Monsieur, in confidence! ’

‘Bah!’ Roux turned to Mademoiselle Martin. ‘In con¬
fidence! You heard him, ma petite ?’

‘Out, cheri.’

‘He admits it. In confidence, of course! ’ He jeered. ‘But
he admitted to having invented the affair of the locks.’

Monsieur Duclos bristled. ‘That, Monsieur, is unjust!’

Roux laughed and put his tongue out very rudely. I
began to feel sorry for Monsieur Duclos. After all, I had
told him that the locks had been forced. But he was
already rallying to his own defence. He stuck his head
forward ferociously.

‘If I were a young man, Monsieur, I should strike
you!’

‘Perhaps,’ put in Vogel anxiously, ‘we should discuss
the matter calmly.’ He hitched up his braces a further
centimetre and laid a hand on Roux’s shoulder.

It was shaken off impatiently. ‘There is no point,’
declared Roux loudly, ‘in discussing anything with this
old imbecile.’

Monsieur Duclos drew a deep breath. ‘You are. Mon¬
sieur,’ he said deliberately, ‘a liar! It was you who stole
the valuables from Monsieur Vadassy. Otherwise, how
do you know that the locks of the suitcase were forced?
I, Duclos, denounce you. Thief and liar! ’

For a moment there was dead silence, then Skelton
and Vogel together leaped on the enraged Roux as he
sprang at his accuser, and grabbed his arms.

‘Let me go! ’ Roux shouted furiously, ‘and I will
strangle him!’

As this was precisely what Vogel and Skelton feared,
they hung on. Monsieur Duclos stroked his beard calmly
and regarded the struggling Roux with interest.


‘Thief and liar!’ he repeated, as though we had not
heard him the first time.

Roux yelped with rage and tried to spit at him.

‘I fhink 3 Monsieur Duclos,’ I said, ‘that it will be better
if you go upstairs.’

He struck an attitude. ‘I will leave the beach. Monsieur,
only when Roux has apologised.’

I was about to argue that the apology, if any, was
due to Roux, when Mademoiselle Martin, who had been
having hysterics in the background, created a diversion
by flin g in g her arms round her lover’s neck and exhort¬
ing him to kill. She was removed in floods of tears by
Frau Vogel and Mary Skelton. By this time, however,
Roux had found tongue and was hurling insults at all
and sundry.

‘Species of monkeys! ’

Monsieur Duclos’s calm deserted him. He leaped into
the breach. ‘Species of impotent goat!’ he retorted hotly.

Mademoiselle Martin screamed. Roux, incensed, focused
his attention once more on his enemy.

‘Species of diseased camel!’ he bawled.

‘Misbegotten cretin! ’ roared Monsieur Duclos.

Roux licked his lips and swallowed hard. For a moment
I thought he was beaten. Then I saw that he was gather¬
ing his forces for the coup de grace. His lips worked.
He drew a deep breath. There was a fraction of a second’s
silence. Then, with the full force of his lungs, he hurled
the word in Monsieur Duclos’s face.

‘Bolshevik!’

Given the appropriate circumstances almost any word
denoting a political or religious creed can become a deadly
insult. At a conference of Moslem dignitaries the word
‘Christian’ could no doubt be used with devastating effect.


At a gathering of middle-aged White Russians the word
‘Bolshevik’ would probably be reckoned a virulent term
of abuse. But this was not a gathering of White Russians.

For a moment there was not a sound. Then someone
giggled. It was, I think, Mary Skelton. It was enough.
We started to laugh. Monsieur Duclos, after one bewil¬
dered look round, managed to join in convincingly. Only
Roux and Odette Martin did not laugh. For a moment he
glared at us savagely. Then he wrenched himself free
of Vogel and Skelton and stalked off across the beach
towards the steps. She followed. As she caught up with
him he turned and shook a fist at us.

‘Well,’ said Skelton, ‘I don’t know what it was all
about, but we certainly do see life at the Reserve.’

Monsieur Duclos was preening himself—a Ulysses after
the fall of Troy. He shook hands all round.

‘A dangerous type, that!’ he commented at large.

‘A type of garngstair! ’ said Herr Vogel.

‘Yes, indeed! ’

To my relief they seemed to have forgotten the ori ginal
point at issue. Not so, however, the Skeltons.

‘I followed most of that,’ said the girl. ‘The old French¬
man was right, wasn’t he? You did say that the locks
were forced, didn’t you?’ She looked at me curiously.

I felt myself reddening.

‘No. You must have been mistaken.’

‘In other words,’ said Skelton slowly, ‘it was one of
the guests.’

‘I don’t understand you.’

‘O.K. We get it.’ He grinned. ‘The stuff returned and
no questions asked. Say no more.’

‘Speak for yourself, Warren. As between friends, Mr
Vadassy, was it one of the servants or wasn’t it?’


188


I shook my head miserably. This was very difficult.

‘You don’t mean to say it was one of the guests?’

‘It wasn’t anybody.’

‘You’re most unconvincing, Mr Vadassy.’

This I could well believe. Fortunately, Monsieur Duclos
chose this moment to announce in penetrating tones
that he was going to make a formal complaint to the
manager.

I excused myself to the Skeltons and took h i m aside.

‘I should be most grateful. Monsieur, if you would say
nothing further about the matter. The whole affair has
been most unpleasant and in a sense I am responsible.
I am anxious for it to be forgotten. I should esteem it a
personal favour to myself if you would overlook this
unfortunate occurrence.’

He stroked his beard and shot a quick glance at me
over the top of his pince-nez.

‘The man insulted me, Monsieur. And in public.’

‘Quite so. But we all saw how you dealt with the
fellow. He came out of the affair very badly. I cannot help
filing that you would lose face by prolonging the issue.
It is best to ignore such types.’

He considered the point. ‘You may be right. But he
had no right to say that the locks were forced when I had
told him quite clearly that there was no question of
violence.’ His eyes met mine without a flicker.

One could only bow to such devastating mental agility.
‘His behaviour demonstrates,’ I agreed, ‘that he was well
aware of being in the wrong.’

‘That is true. Very well, Monsieur, at your request I
take the matter no further. I accept your assurance that
my honour has been upheld.’

We bowed. He turned to the others.


‘At this Monsieur’s request,’ he announced impressively,
‘I have agreed to take the matter no further. It is con¬
cluded.’

‘A wise decision,’ said Vogel gravely and winked at
me.

‘Yes, indeed! ’

‘This Roux, however, must take care,’ added Monsieur
Duclos ominously. ‘I will suffer no further insults from
him. A dirty type, beneath contempt. You observe that
he is not married to Mademoiselle. Poor child! That such
a type should lure her from the path of virtue!’

‘Yes, yes.’ Herr Vogel hitched up his trousers, winked
at me, and wandered off, followed by Duclos.

‘A dirty type,’ I could hear the old man saying; ‘a very
dirty type.’

The Skeltons were anointing each other with sun oil.
I lay back on the sand and thought of Roux.

A bad-tempered, unpleasant man; and yet you could
see why the woman found him attractive. There was a
lithe precision in his movements; probably he was a good
lover. He gave the impression of possessing both rat-like
cunning and rat-like simplicity. A small, quick mind and
a dangerous one. You would know what he thought when
he acted. Yes, he would be dangerous all right. Physically
strong, too; his body was amazingly wiry. He reminded
you of a ferret.

Ferret! That was a word that Schimler had used. ‘It’s
amazing the way they ferret things out.’ I could hear him
saying it. ‘We heard that a Gestapo agent had been sent
into France.’ Fool! I ought to have thought of that before.
The Gestapo agent, the man who had been sent into
France to ‘persuade’ a German to return to Germany,
the man who Schimler thought had identified him, the

190


man who would not act until he was sure of his prey—
Roux. It was as clear as daylight.

I shut my eyes, smiling to myself.

‘What’s the joke, Mr Vadassy?’ said Mary Skelton.

I opened my eyes. ‘There’s no joke. I was just
thinking.’

It felt good, too. I had had another idea.


15

The beach was deserted earlier than usual. A cool wind
had sprung up and, for the first time since I had left
Paris, I saw the sky heavy with cloud. The sea had
changed in colour to a dingy grey. The red rocks no
longer glowed. It was as if, with the going of the sun,
the life of the place had also gone.

As I went up to put on some warmer clothes I saw
that the waiters were laying the tables in the dining¬
room on the first floor. In my room I heard the first drops
of rain patter through the leaves of the creeper outside
my window.

I finished changing and rang for the chambermaid.

‘What is the number of the room of Monsieur Roux
and Mademoiselle Martin?’

‘Nine, Monsieur.’

‘Thank you; that is all.’ The door closed behind her.
I lit a cigarette and sat down to evolve my plan of action,
to get everything quite clear before I started.

This plan, I told myself, was utterly foolproof. Here
was a Gestapo agent bent on tracking down a man named
Schimler. What was more, there was every likelihood that
he had succeeded in doing so. That meant, then, that in
all probability this agent had ferreted out information
about the guests at the Reserve which would be of im¬
mense value to me. If I could get that information out
of him, if I could get him to talk, perhaps I should find


192



myself in possession of tie very clue I needed. It was a
real chance. But I should have to go carefully. Roux
must not become suspicious. I must not appear curious.

I must draw the information out of him, pump him very
gently, make it look as though I were listening under
protest. I should have to keep my wits about me. This
time there must be no mistake.

I got up and walked along the corridor to room number
nine. There was a murmur of voices coming from inside.
I knocked. The voices ceased. There was a scuffle. A
wardrobe door squeaked. Then the woman called:
‘Entrez!’ I opened die door.

Mademoiselle Martin, swathed in a semi-transparent
pale blue peignoir, was sitting on the bed manicuring her
nails. The peignoir, I guessed, had been hurriedly
snatched from the wardrobe. Roux was standing in front
of the washbasin, shaving. They both stared at me in¬
credulously.

I had opened my mouth to excuse my intrusion, but
Roux got in first.

‘What do you want?’ he snapped.

1 must ask you to excuse my intruding on you like
this. Actually I came to offer you an apology.’ .

His eyes flickered over me suspiciously.

‘What for?’

‘I was afraid that you might think that I was in
some way responsible for Duclos insulting you this after¬
noon.’

He turned away and began to wipe the soap off his
face.‘Why should you be responsible?’

‘It was, after all, my mistake that led to the disagree¬
ment.’

He threw the towel on the bed and addressed the



woman. ‘Have I said one word about this man since we
left the beach?’

‘Non, cheri.’

He turned to me. ‘You are answered.’

I stood my ground.

‘Nevertheless, I feel a certain responsibility. If I had
not been so foolish it would never have happened.’

‘It is now finished,’ he said irritably.

‘Fortunately, yes.’ I made a desperate effort to touch
his vanity. ‘If you will allow me to say so, I thought you
conducted yourself with dignity and restraint.’

‘If they had not held my arms I would have throttled
him.’

‘You were undoubtedly provoked.’

‘Of course.’

This did not seem to be leading anywhere. I tried
again.

‘Are you staying here long?’

He shot a suspicious glance at me.

‘Why do you want to know?’

‘Oh, no special reason. I just thought that we might
play a game of Russian billiards together—to show that
there is no ill feeling.’

‘Are you a good player?’

‘Not very good.’

‘Then I shall probably beat you. I am very good. I
beat the American. He does not play well. I do not like
playing with inferior players. The American I found dull.’
‘A pleasant young man, however.’

‘Possibly.’

I persevered. ‘The girl is pretty.’

‘I do not like her. She is too fat. I prefer very thin
women. Don’t I, chert?’


194


Mademoiselle Martin emitted a tinny laugh. He sat
down on the bed, leaned across and pulled her to him.
They kissed passionately. Then he pushed her away. She
smiled triumphantly at me, smoothed down her hair, and
resumed her manicuring.

‘You see,’ he said, ‘she is skinny. She pleases me.’

I perched myself tentatively on the arm of a chair.
‘Madame is charming.’

‘Not bad.’ He lit a thin black cheroot with an air of a
man to whom such successes were commonplace and blew
a jet of smoke in my direction. Suddenly: ‘Why did you
come here, Monsieur?’

I jumped. ‘To apologise, naturally. I have ex¬
plained. ...’

He shook his head impatiently. ‘I asked you why you
came here—here to this hotel.’

‘For a holiday. I spent part of it in Nice, then I came
here.’

‘You have enjoyed your stay?’

‘Of course. It is not ended yet.’

‘When do you expect to leave?’

‘I have not made up my mind.’

Fleshy lids dropped over his eyes.

‘Tell me, what do you think of this English major?’

‘Nothing in particular. A common type of English¬
man.’

‘Did you lend him any money?’

‘"Why, no. Did he ask you, too?’

He grinned sardonically. ‘Yes, he asked me.’

‘And did you oblige him?’

‘Do I look such a fool?’

‘Then what made you ask about him?’

‘He will be leaving the hotel early in the morning. And


195


I heard him ask the manager to book a cabin on the
Algiers steamer from Marseilles. He must have found a
mug.’

‘Who could it have been?’

‘If I knew that I would not ask you. These little things
interest me.’ He twisted the cheroot between his lips to
wet the end of it. ‘Another little thing interests me. Who
is this Heinberger?’

It was said without the least hint of emphasis, the
question of a man idly determined to find something of
interest in an uncongenial conversation.

For no reason my spine tingled as if with fear.

‘Heinberger?’ I repeated.

‘Yes, Heinberger. Why does he sit always by himself?
Why does he never bathe? I saw you talking to him the
other day.’

‘I know nothing about him. He is a Swiss, isn’t he?’

‘I don’t know. I am asking you.’

‘Then I’m afraid I don’t know.’

‘What were you talking about?’

‘I can’t remember. The weather, probably.’

‘What a waste of time! I like to find thing s out about
people when I talk to them. I like to know the differences
between what people are saying to you and what they are
thinking ,*

‘Indeed ! Do you find that there is always a differ¬
ence?’

‘Invariably. All men are liars. Women sometimes speak
the truth. But men, never. That is right, is it not, ma
petite ?’

c Oui, cheri . 3

c Oui } cheri!’ he echoed derisively. ‘She knows that if
she lied to me I would break her neck. I tell you this,

196



my friend; most men are cowards. They dislike a fact
except when it is so wrapped up in lies and sentiments
that the sharp edge of it cannot hurt them. When a
man tells the truth he is, depend upon it, a dangerous
man.’

‘You must find that point of view very fatiguing.’

I find it entertaining, my dear Monsieur. People are
intensely interesting. You, for instance. I find you in¬
teresting. You call yourself a language teacher. You are a
Hungarian with a Yugoslav passport.’

‘I’m sure you didn’t find that out by talking to me,’ I
said playfully.

‘I keep my ears open. The manager told Vogel. Vogel
was curious.’

‘I see. Quite simple.’

‘Not at all simple. Very puzzling. I ask myself ques¬
tions. Why, I ask, does a Hungarian with a Yugoslav pass¬
port live in France? What is this mysterious little trip
that he makes every morning to the villa ge?’

You are very observant. I live in France because 1
work in France. I am afraid that there is nothing mysteri-
ous about my trips to the village either. I go to the post
office to telephone my fiancee in Paris.’

‘So? The telephone service has improved. It usually
takes an hour to get through.’ He shrugged. ‘It is nothing.
There are more difficult questions.’ He blew the ash off
his cheroot. ‘Why, for example, were the locks of Mon¬
sieur Vadassy’s suitcase broken open in the mor nin g and
not broken in the afternoon?’

‘Very simple again. Because Monsieur Duclos has a
bad memory.’

His eyes flickered from the end of his cheroot to my
face. Exactly. A bad memory. He could not remember


197


exactly what was said. Bad liars never can remember
these things. Their minds are choked by their own lies.
But I am curious. Were the locks of your suitcase broken
open?’

‘I thought we had settled that. No, they were not.’

‘Of course not. Please smoke. I do not like to smoke
alone. Odette will smoke. Give her a cigarette, Vadassy.’

I produced a packet from my pocket. He raised his
eyebrows. ‘No case? That is careless of you. I should
think that you would keep it in your pocket for safety.
How do we know that this Heinberger or the English
major is not at this moment stealing?’ He sighed. ‘Well,
well! Odette, cheri, a cigarette? You know I do not like
to smoke alone. It will not hurt your teeth. Have you
noticed her teeth, Vadassy? They are fine.’

He leaned suddenly across the bed, dragged the woman
backwards, and thumbed her upper lip back from her
teeth. She made no effort to resist.

‘Good, aren’t they?’

‘Yes, very.’

‘That’s what I like. A thin blonde with fine teeth.’ He
released her. She sat up, kissed him on the lobe of the
ear, and took one of my cigarettes. Roux struck a match
for her. As he blew it out he looked at me again.

‘You had a day with the police, didn’t you?’

‘Everybody seems to have heard about that,’ I said
lightly. ‘They didn’t seem to like my passport.’

‘What’s the matter with it?’

‘I forgot to renew it.’

‘How did you get into the country?’

I laughed. ‘You remind me of the police, Monsieur.’

‘I told you that I found people interesting.’ He lounged
back on one elbow. ‘One thing I have found out. That

198


all men, liars or not, have one thing in common. Do you
know what that is?’

‘No.’

He leaned forward suddenly, grasped my hand, and
tapped the palm with his forefinger. ‘A love of money,’
he said softly. He released my hand. ‘You, Vadassy, are
fortunate. You are poor and money is very sweet to you.
You have no political sentiments to confuse your mind!
You have an opportunity of making money. Why don’t
you take it?’

‘I don’t understand you.’ And I didn’t understand him
for the moment. ‘What opportunity are you talking about?’

For a moment he was silent. I saw that the woman had
stopped filing her nails and, with the file still resting on
the end of her finger, was listening. Then:

‘What is today, Vadassy?’

‘Today? Saturday, of course.’

He shook his head slowly.

‘No, it isn’t, Vadassy. It’s Friday.’

I emitted a bewildered laugh.

‘But I assure you. Monsieur, it is Saturday.’

Again he shook his head.

‘Friday, Vadassy.’ His eyes narrowed. He leaned for¬
ward. ‘If, Vadassy, I had a certain piece of information
that I think you could give me, I would be prepared to
bet five thousand francs that today was Friday.’

‘But you would lose.’

‘Precisely. I should lose five thousand francs to you.
But, on the other hand, I should gain the little piece of
information.’

And then I saw the point. I was being offered a bribe.
A sentence of Schimler’s flashed through my mind. ‘He
won’t act until he’s sure.’ This man had seen me talking


199



to Schimler. He might even have seen me enter his room.
I remembered suddenly the sound of a door closing after
I had left room number fourteen. He obviously thought
that I was in Herr Heinberger’s confidence; and he was
"prepared to buy evidence of Heinberger’s real identity.
I looked at him blankly.

‘I can’t think* what information I could give you. Mon¬
sieur, that would compensate you for the loss of five
thousand francs.’

‘No? Are you quite sure?’

‘Yes.’ I stood up. ‘In any case, I never bet on cert¬
ainties. For a moment, Monsieur, I thought that you were
serious.’

He smiled. ‘You may be sure, Vadassy, I never allow a
joke to go too far. Where are you going when you leave
here?’

‘Back to Paris.’

‘Paris? Why?’

‘I live there.’ I stared him in the eyes. ‘And you, I
suppose, will be going back to Germany.’

‘And why, Vadassy, should you think that I am not a
Frenchman?’ His voice had dropped. The smile was still
on his face, a very ugly smile. I saw the muscles of his
legs tighten as though he were about to spring.

‘You have a slight accent. I don’t know why, but I
assumed that you were a German.’

He shook his head. ‘I am a Frenchman, Vadassy. Please
do not forget that you, a foreigner, cannot tell a true
French accent when you hear it. Do not, please, insult
me.’ The fleshy lids had dropped over his bulbous eyes
until they were almost closed.

‘Forgive me. I think it is time I had an aperitif. Will
you and Madame join me?’


200


‘No, we shall not drink with you.’

‘I hope I haven’t offended you.’

‘On the contrary, it has been a pleasure to talk with
you—a great pleasure.’ There was a note of exaggerated
cordiality in his voice that was very disconcerting.

‘It is good of you to say so.’ I opened the door. ‘Au
’voir, Monsieur, au ’voir, Madame.’

He did not get up. ‘Au ’voir. Monsieur,’ he s aid
ironically.

I shut the door. As I walked away his loud, unpleasant
laugh rang out in the room behind me.

I went downstairs feeling several kinds of fool. In¬
stead of doing the pumping I had been pumped. Far from
skilfully extracting valuable information, I had been
forced into a defensive position and answered questions
as meekly as if I had been in the witness-box. Finally, I
had been offered a bribe. The man had obviously re¬
alised, too, that I had faked the robbery. He had assumed,
as Koche had, that I was a petty crook. A charming
specimen! Schimler, poor devil, had a very slim chance
of bluffing a man like that. As usual, I began to think of
the crushing things I ought to have said. The trouble was
that my brain moved far too slowly. I was a dullard, a
halfwit.

In the hall a waiter accosted me.

‘Ah, Monsieur, we have been trying to find you. You
are wanted on the telephone. A call from Paris.’

‘For me? Are you sure?’

‘Quite sure, Monsieur.’

I went to the office and shut the door behind me.

‘Hello!’

‘Hello, Vadassy!’

‘Who is that?’


201


‘Commissaire de Police.’

‘The waiter said that it was a call from Paris.’

‘I told the operator to say that. Are you alone?’

‘Yes.’

‘Have you heard whether anyone is leaving the Reserve
today?’

‘The English couple leave tomorrow morning.’

‘No one else.’

‘Yes. I leave tomorrow.’

‘What do you mean? You will leave when you are
told to do so. You know Monsieur Beghin’s instruc¬
tions.’

‘I have been told to leave.’

‘By whom?’

‘Koche.’ All the pent-up bitterness of the day’s disasters
welled up within me. Briefly and very acidly I described
the outcome of Beghin’s instructions of the mor ning

He listened in silence. Then:

‘You are sure no one else is leaving, besides the
English?’

‘It is possible, but if so I have not heard about it.’

Another silence. At last:

‘Very well. That is all now.’

‘But what shall I do?’

‘You will receive further instructions in due course.’

He hung up.

I stared wretchedly at the telephone. I would receive
further instructions in due course. Well, I could do no
more. I was beaten.


202





16

The clock struck nine. It was a thin, high-pitched sound,
and very soft.

I can see the scene now, clearly. There are no blurred
edges. Here nothing is out of focus. It is as if I were
looking through a stereoscope at a perfect coloured repro¬
duction of the room and of the people in it.

The rain has stopped, and the breeze is once more
gende and warm. It is hot and steamy in the room, and
the windows are wide open. The wet leaves of the creeper
just outside gleam in the light from the electric ‘candles’
in their rococo brackets on the walls. Beyond the stone
balustrade on the terrace the moon is be ginning to rise
through the fir trees.

The Skeltons and I are sitting near to the window, the
remains of the coffee before us on a low table. Across
the room Roux and Mademoiselle Martin are playing
Russian billiards. He is standing over her, guiding the
cue, and as I watch I see her press her body a gains t his .,
and look round quickly to see if anyone has noticed the
action. In the other corner, near the door leading to the
hall, there are two small groups. Monsieur Duclos is
stroking his beard with his pince-nez and talking in
French to an intent Frau Vogel. Herr Vogel is saying
something in halting Italian to Mrs Clandon-Hartley-—
an unusually animated Mrs aandon-Hartley—while
the Major listens, the ghost of a smile on his lips.


203


Only Schimler and, of course, the Koches, are absent.

I remember that Skelton was saying something to me
about Roux and Duclos pretending to ignore one another.
I scarcely heard him. I was looking round the room at
their faces. Nine of them. I had talked to all of them,
watched them, listened to them and now—now I knew
no more about them than I had known on the day—what
ages ago it seemed—when I had come to the Reserve.
No more? That was not quite true. I had learned some¬
thing of the lives of some of them. But what did I know
about their thoughts, about the minds that worked behind
those masks? A man’s account of his own actions was
like the look he habitually wore on his face, no more than
the expression, the statement of an attitude. You could
never get at the whole man any more than you could
see four faces of a cube. The mind was a figure with an
i nfini te number of dimensions, a fluid in ceaseless move¬
ment, unfathomable, unaccountable.

The Major still had that faint smile on his lips. His
wife, her hands fluttering slightly as she said something to
Vogel, seemed, for the first time, to be alive. Of course!
Someone had lent them money. Who was it? I knew so
little that I could not even make an intelligent guess.

Duclos had put his pince-nez back on his nose, and
was listening to Frau Vogel’s guttural French, with his
head cocked patronisingly. Roux, his eyes fixed glassily
on the balls, was demonstrating a stroke. I watched them
all fascinated. It was like seeing dancers through a
window that shut out the music. There was a mad solem¬
nity about their antics....

The Skeltons burst out laughing. I turned round feel¬
ing rather foolish.

‘Sorry,’ said he; ‘but we’ve been watching your face,


204





Mr Vadassy. It was getting longer and longer. We were
afraid you were going to burst into tears.

‘I was thinking how much we identify ourselves with
other people and yet how separate we are. You see, I’m
leaving tomorrow morning.’

Their dismay was so well done that I had a sudden
feeling that they might really be sorry to see me go. A
wave of emotion swept over me; self-pity, no doubt. I
fought my way clear of it.

‘I shall be sorry to go myself,’ I said. ‘Will you be
staying long?’

There was an almost imperceptible pause before he
replied, and I saw her glance at him quickly.

‘Oh,’ he said carelessly, ‘for a while, I guess.’

And then she leaned forward. ‘For three months, to
be exact,’ she said and glanced at h im again. ‘There’s no
reason why we shouldn’t tell Mr Vadassy. I’m tired of
this act anyway.’

‘Now look, Mary ...’ he began warningly, and I sud¬
denly felt sick.

‘Oh, what’s the difference?’ She smiled faintly at me.
‘We’re not brother and sister, Mr Vadassy. We’re cousins
and we’re living in sin.’

‘Congratulations,’ I said. I still felt sick, but in a dif¬
ferent way now. I was sick with jealousy. She smiled at
me.

‘Well you’d better tell about the hocus-pocus, too,’
said her lover gloomily. ‘It’s not entirely usual in France
for people in our situation to go around pretending to be
brother and sister.’

She shrugged. ‘It’s all so absurd, really. When we
came here we had separate rooms, and, because of the
names on our passports and the forms you fill out and


everything, they took us for brother and sister. Well then,
when it turned out that we could do with one room after
all, it meant that we’d either have to move to another
hotel or stay here as we were.’

‘Or look incestuous,’ he put in unhappily.

‘So, as we felt a bit sentimental about this place, we
stayed. You see, we can’t get married for three months
yet because if Warren gets married before his twenty-
first birthday we lose fifty thousand dollars from
Grandfather Skelton, which would be crazy, wouldn’t
it?’

‘Yes,’ I said, but they were looking at each other and
I knew now what it was that made them seem so attrac¬
tive. They were in love.

‘Absolutely crazy,’ he said, s milin g.

And then, Monsieur Duclos, abandoned by or having
abandoned Frau Vogel, loomed over me.

‘They are a very charming couple, these Americans,’
he said. .

‘Yes, very charming.’

‘I was saying as much to Madame Vogel. She is a most
intelligent woman. Monsieur Vogel, you know, is director
of the Swiss State Power Company. He is a very import¬
ant man. I have, of course, heard of him before. His
offices at Berne are one of the sights of the city.

‘I thought he came from Constance.’

He adjusted his pince-nez warily. ‘He has also a large
villa at Constance. It is very fine. He has invited me to
stay with him there.’

‘How pleasant for you.’

‘Yes. Naturally, I expect we shall discuss a good deal
of business.’

‘Naturally.’


206


‘When businessmen meet for pleasure, my friend, the
talk is always of business.

‘Quite so.’

‘Again, it is possible that we may be able to be of service
to one another. Co-operation, you understand? It is most
important in business. That is what I tell the work-people
in my factories. If they will co-operate with me, I will
co-operate with them. But they must co-operate with me
first. Co-operation cannot be one-sided.’

‘Of course not.’

‘What’s he saying?’ inquired Skelton. ‘I’ve heard the
word co-operation ten times.’

‘He says that co-operation is important.’

‘That’s fine.’

‘Did you know,’ pursued Monsieur Duclos, ‘that Major
and Madame Clandon-Hartley are leaving tomorrow 5 ’

‘Yes.’

‘Someone, clearly, has lent them money. Curious, is
it not? Personally, I would not lend the Major money.
He asked me for ten thousand francs. A trifling sum. I
should not miss it. But it is a question of principle. I am
a businessman.’

‘I thought it was two thousand francs he wanted. That
was what you told me before.’

‘He has increased his demands,’ he said blandly. ‘A
type of criminal, without a doubt.’

‘Personally, I should not have thought so.’

‘A businessman must have an eye for a criminal.
Fortunately, English criminals are always very simple.’

‘Oh?’

‘It is well known. The French criminal is a snalrp, the
American criminal a wolf, and the English criminal a rat.
Snakes, wolves, and rats. The rat is a very simple animal


He fights only when he is in a corner. At other rW s he
merely nibbles.’

.‘And you really think that Major Clandon-Hartley is
an English criminal?’

Slowly, deliberately, Monsieur Duclos removed the
pince-nez from his nose and tapped me on the arm with
them.

‘Look carefully at his face,’ he said, ‘and you will see
the rat in it. What is more,’ he added triumphandy, ‘he
told me so himself.’

This was fantastic.

The Skeltons, tired of trying to follow Monsieur Duclos’s
rapid French, had found a copy of UIllustration, and,
were pencilling in moustaches on the faces reproduced in
it. I was left to deal with Monsieur Duclos alone. He
edged a chair close to mine.

‘Of course,’ he said impressively, ‘I speak in confidence.
The English major would not like to know that his
identity was discovered.’

‘What identity?’

‘You do not know?’

‘No.’

■Ah! He stroked his beard. ‘Then X had better say no
more. He is relying upon my discretion.’ He rose, gave
me a meaning look, and moved away. I saw that Koche
had come into the room with Schimler. Monsieur Duclos
hurried across to intercept them. I heard him announce
that die rain had ceased. Koche stopped politely, but
Schimler walked round them and came towards me. He
was looking terribly ill.

‘I hear that you are leaving tomorrow, Vadassy.’

‘Yes, was that all you heard?’

He shook his head. ‘No. I think that a few explanations

208





would be helpful. Koche is afraid that there is something
going on in his hotel that he does not know about. He is
worried. You, it seems, might be able to clear the matter
up.’

‘I am afraid not. If Koche cares to apply at the police
station ...’

‘So that’s it! You are from the police.’

‘From them, but not of them. Another thing . Herr
Heinberger: I should advise you not to talk to me for
very long. I was seen leaving your room this afternoon.
I have been questioned on the subject by a cert ain gentle¬
man.’

His smile was ghasdy. His eyes met mine. ‘And did
you answer the question?’

‘I hope I lied convincingly.’

‘That was good of you,’ he said softly. He nodded to
me and to the Skeltons, and walked away to join Koche.

‘He looks as though he’s going to fall to pieces’ said
Skelton.

For some reason the comment irritated me. ‘Some day,’
I said rashly, ‘I hope to be able to tell you something
about that man.’

‘Won’t you tell us now, Mr Vadassy?’

‘I’m afraid I can’t.’

‘You’ve cooked your goose,’ he said; ‘you’ll get no
peace now. Look, honey, Roux has finished with the table.
What about a game? Do you mind, Mr Vadassy?’

‘Of course not. Go ahead!’

They got up and went over to the billiard table. I was
left alone to think.

This, I told myself, was in all probability my last
night of freedom. These were the people I would remem¬
ber. This was the scene that I would picture: the Vogels

209


o




and the Clandon-Hartleys talking together, with Duclos
listening, stroking his beard, waiting for a chance to
break into their conversation; Koche talking to Roux and
Odette Martin; Schimler sitting by hims elf, idly turning
the pages of a newspaper; the Skeltons bending together
over the billiard table. And with them all there was the
warm, scented night, the drip-drip of water on the ter¬
race, the faint hiss of the sea against the rocks at the
point, the stars and the light of the moon striking through
the trees. It all seemed so very peaceful. And yet there
was no peace. Outside in the garden the monstrosities
of the insect kingdom were creeping along the wet
branches and stems in search of food; ‘ watchful, intent,
preying and preyed upon. In the darkness, dramas were
being enacted. Nothing was at rest, nothing was still. The
night was moving, alive with tragedy. While inside ...

There was a movement from the opposite comer of the
room. Frau Vogel had risen to her feet, and was stand¬
ing smiling diffidently at the others. Her husband seemed
to be trying to persuade her to do something. I saw
Koche break off his conversation with Roux and cross to
her.

‘We should all be most grateful,’ I heard him say.

She nodded doubtfully. Then, to my astonishment, I
saw Koche lead her over to the upright piano against
the wall and open it for her. She sat down s tiffl y and ran
her short, thick fingers over the keys. The Skeltons turned
round in surprise. Schimler looked up from his paper.
Roux sank rather impatiently into a chair and drew
Mademoiselle Martin on his knee. Vogel glanced round
the room in triumph. Duclos removed his pince-nez ex¬
pectantly.

I saw Schimler lean forward, a strange look on his face


210




as he watched the stiff, dumpy figure, her ridiculous wisps
of chiffon agitated by the quick movements of her han ds
and arms.

Frau Vogel, it was clear, had once had a talent. There
was about her playing a curious, faded brilliance, like
that of a paste buckle in a hamper of old ball-dresses. A nd
then I forgot Frau Vogel and listened to the music.

When she had finished there was a moment of dead
silence in the room, and then a burst of clapping. She
half turned on her chair, flushed, and blinked nervously
at Koche. She went to get up, but her husband called over
to her to play again, and she sank back on the chair.
For a moment she appeared to be thinking ; then she
raised her hands to the keyboard and Bach’s ‘Jesu, joy of
man’s desiring’ stole out sofdy into the room.

Sometimes, after a day’s work, I have gone back to my
room and, without troubling to turn on the fight, sunk
into my easy chair and remained there motionless,
relaxed, savouring the slow, pleasant ache that creeps
through the limbs when they are very weary. That was
what happened to me that evening as I listened to Frau
Vogel playing. Only, now, it was not my body tha t
yielded so thankfully, but my mind. Instead of the slow,
pleasant ache creeping through my limbs there was the
melody of a choral prelude entwining itself in my con¬
sciousness. My eyes closed. If only this would go on. If
only this would go on. If only ...

When the interruption came I did not at first notice it.
There was a murmur of voices from the hall, someone
hissed a request for silence, a chair grated on the floor.

I opened my eyes in time to see Koche disappearing
hurriedly through the door, which he closed sofdy behind
him. A few moments later I heard it open again noisily.


211





It all seemed to happen in the fraction of a second; but
the first intimation I had that anything was wrong’was
that Frau Vogel stopped suddenly in the middle of a bar.
Instinctively I looked across at her first. She was sitting!
her hands poised over the keys, staring fixedly over the
top of the piano, as though she were looking at a ghost.
Then her hands dropped slowly on to the keyboard!
sounding a soft discord. My gaze travelled to the door!
There, standing on the threshold, were two uniformed
agents de police.

They looked round the room menacingly. One of them
took a step forward.

‘Which of you is Josef Vadassy? ’

I stood up slowly, too dazed to speak.

They clumped across the room towards me.

You are under arrest. You will accompany us to the
Commissariat.’

Frau Vogel let out a litde cry.

‘But ...’

‘There are no “buts”. Come on.’

They gripped my arms.

Monsieur Duclos darted forward.

‘What is the charge?’

‘That does not concern you,’ retorted the leading agent
curtly. He jerked me towards the door.

Monsieur Duclos’s pince-nez quivered. ‘I am a citizen
of the Republic,’ he declared fiercely. ‘I have a right to
know.’

The agent glanced round. ‘Curious, eh?’ He grinned.
Very well, the charge is one of espionage. You’ve had a
dangerous man among you. Come on, Vadassy. March!’

The Skeltons, the Vogels, Roux, Mademoiselle Martin,
the Clandon-Hardeys, Schimler, Duclos, Koche—for an


212


instant I saw their faces, white and motionless, turned
towards me. Then I was through the door. Behind me a
woman, Frau Vogel I think, screamed hysterically.

I had received my instructions.



17

I was taken to the Commissariat in a closed car driven
by a third agent.

I suppose that this fact should have surprised me.
Arrested men are not usually afforded the luxury of a
car to convey them to a police poste no more than half
a kilometre away. But it did not surprise me. Nothing
short of a civic reception by the mayor and corporation
of St Gatien would have surprised me. It had come. That
which I had known all along in my heart would happen,
had happened. I was under arrest again. My parole had j

been withdrawn. This, then, was the end. True, I had |

not expected quite so dramatic an exit from the Reserve;
but, all things considered, it was probably better this
way—I had at least been spared another night of sus¬
pense. It was almost a relief to feel that I had to thint-
for myself no longer, that Monsieur Mathis’s sarcasms
could no longer touch me, that I could do nothing but
acquiesce. ;

I wondered what the Skeltons were thinking about it j
all. It must have been a shock to them. Duclos, of course,
would be beside himself with excitement. He would prob¬
ably be telling the others that he’d known about me all
along. Schimler? That did worry me a little. I would
have liked him to have known the truth. As for the rest...
Koche would not be surprised. The Major, however,
would be horrified. He would probably advocate a firing


squad. Roux, no doubt, would laugh unpleasandy. The
Vogels would click their tongues and look solemn. And
yet one of them would be thinking hard, one of them
would know that I was neither a spy nor dangerous.
That man, the man who had slammed the writing-room
door, who had searched my room and taken two spools
of film, who had knocked me down, whose fingers had
fumbled in my pockets; he would go scot free, while I
rotted in prison. What would his thoughts be like?
Triumphant? What did it matter? What did it matter
what any of them thought? Nothing. All the it

would be interesting to know which of them really was
the spy—very interesting. Well, I would have plenty of
time in which to make my guesses.

The tyres grated on the shingle square in front of the
Co mmi ssariat. I was taken into the waiting-room with the
wooden forms. As before, an agent waited with me. This
time, however, I did not attempt to talk. I just waited.

The hands of the clock in the room had crept round
to half past ten before the door opened and Beghin
came in.

So far as I could see he still had on the same tussore
suit that he had been wearing three days previously. In
his hand was the same limp handkerchief. He was still
sweating profusely. One thing only surprised me. He
seemed to be smaller than I had imagined. For the first
time I realised what a monster my thoughts had made
of him. In my imagination he had grown into an ogre, a
foul, corrupt colossus of evil preying upon the innocent
who crossed his path—a devil. Now I saw before me a
man, fat and gross and sweating, but a man.

For a moment the small, heavy-lidded eyes stared down
at me as though he were unable to remember who I was.


215






Then he nodded to the agent. The man saluted, went
out of the room and shut the door behind him.

‘Well, Vadassy, have you enjoyed your little holiday?’
Once again the high-pitched voice took me unawares. I
stared back at him coldly.

‘I am to be the scapegoat after all, eh?’

He bent down, pulled one of the forms away from
the wall and sat down on it, facing me. The wood creaked
under his weight. He wiped his hands on the handker¬
chief.

‘It’s been very warm,’ he said, and then glanced up
at me. ‘What did they do when you were arrested?’

‘Who, the agents ?’

‘No, your fellow guests.’

‘They did nothing.’ I heard my own voice develop an
edge to it. I knew, somehow, with half my brain, that
I was losing my temper and that I could not help doing
so. “They did nothing,’ I repeated. ‘What would you ex¬
pect them to do? Duclos wanted to know what the charge
was. Frau Vogel screamed. Otherwise they just looked.
I don’t suppose they’re used to seeing people arrested.’
My temper rose suddenly to boiling point. ‘Though I
expect that if they stayed long enough in St Gatien they
would get used to it. Next time one of the fishermen gets
drunk and beats his wife you might try arresting Vogel.
Or would that be too dangerous? Would the Swiss consul
have something to say? Perhaps he would. Or wouldn’t
the Department of Naval Intelligence have enough intel¬
ligence to see that? Do you know, Beghin, that when you
talked to me in that cell three days ago I actually thought
that, although you might be a bullying blackguard of a
policeman, it was possible that you had some sense. I
thought that even if you did threaten and ask inane


216




-n- :rr-S9BSmpgn|

"I


questions, you at least knew what you were doing. I have
found since that I was wrong. You haven’t any sense and
you don’t know what you’re doing. You’re a fool. You’ve
blundered so many times that I’ve lost count of them.
If I hadn t had a little sense and interpreted your instruc¬
tions in my own way, your ...’

He had been listening calmly; now he got to his feet,
his fist drawn back as though he were about to strike me.
‘If you hadn’t what?’ he shouted savagely.

I did not flinch. I felt reckless and vindictive.

£ I see you don’t like the truth. I said that if I hadn’t
interpreted your instructions in my own way your preci¬
ous spy would have taken fright and bolted. You told me
to question the guests about their cameras. A lunatic
would have seen that that was a fatal mistake.’

He sat down again. ‘Well, what did you do?’ he said
grimly: ‘Fake the information for me?’

‘No, I used some sense. You see’—this bitterly—‘in
my simple innocence I thought that if I could get the
information you required without jeopardising the chances
of catching the spy when he had been identified, I should
receive some consideration at the hands of the police. If
I had known just how badly you were going to bungle
your end of the business, I doubt if I would have
bothered. However, I obtained the information about the
cameras by the simple process of using my eyes. When,
as was inevitable, the fake robbery was discovered to be
a fake, I managed to retrieve the situation by confusing
the others’ minds sufficiently to make them—or at any rate
most of them—accept the story that the whole thing was
a mistake. Now, of course, the fat is in the fire. This
time I can’t retrieve your mistake. You’ve given the alarm.
The Clandon-Hartleys are leaving tomorrow in any case.


217




I don’t suppose any of them will care to stay after this.
You’ve lost your suspects. Still,’ I shrugged, ‘I don’t
suppose you care. The Commissaire will be satisfied.
You’ve got someone to convict. That’s all you policemen
want, isn’t it?’ I stood up. ‘Well, now that’s over. I’ve
been wanting to get that off my chest. If you don’t mind,
and have quite finished gloating, I’d like to be locked in
my cell now. For one thing, this room is stuffy; for an¬
other, I didn’t get much sleep last night. I’ve got a
headache and I’m tired.’

He took out a packet of cigarettes.

‘Cigarette, Vadassy?’

I sneered. ‘The last time you said that, you had some¬
thing dirty up your sleeve. What do you want now, a
signed confession? Because if you do you’re not going to
get it. I absolutely refuse. Understand that, I absolutely
refuse.’

‘Take a cigarette, Vadassy. You’re not going to sleep
yet.’

‘Oh, I see! Third degree, eh?’

‘Sacre chien /’ he squeaked. ‘Take a cigarette.’

I took one. He lit his and tossed me the matches.

‘Now!’ He blew a cloud of smoke in the air. ‘I have
an apology to make to you.’

‘Oh?’ I put all I could into the word.

‘Yes, an apology. I made a mistake. I overrated your
intelligence. And I underrated it. Both.’

‘Splendid! And what am I supposed to do, Monsieur
Beghin? Burst into tears and sign die confession now?’

He frowned. ‘You listen to me.’

‘I am listening—fascinated.’

He ran his handkerchief round the inside of his collar.
‘That tongue of yours, Vadassy, will get you into trouble


218



one of these days. Has it not occurred to you that it is a
little unusual for a prisoner to be sitting where you are
now instead of in a cell?’

‘It has. I’m wondering where the trick is.’

‘There is no trick, you fool,’ he squeaked angrily.
‘Listen. The first thing you ought to know is that every
one of the instructions you have been given has had one
object—that of making the spy leave the Reserve. You
were told to make those inquiries about the cameras with
just that object in view. We wanted to alarm him. When
that failed—and I can see now why it did fail—we told
you to report the faked robbery. The man had searched
your room; he had searched your pockets. I say we

wanted to alarm him, not enough to put him to flight__

that is why we ourselves kept away from the Reserve—
but just enough to make him think that he was r unning
a risk by staying. Again we failed. The first time I had
failed to reckon on your reasoning the way you did from
the facts in your possession. That was my fault. I had
forgotten how litde you knew. The second time I failed
to reckon with your inexperience. Koche saw through you
too quickly.’

‘But,’ I protested, ‘how on earth did you expect to
catch the spy like that? What was your idea? Arrest the
first man to pack up and leave the Reserve? If so, you’d
better arrest Major Clandon-Hardey. He’s leaving first
thing in the morning. If that’s your idea of catching a spy,
then heaven help France.’

To my surprise, I saw the beg inning s of a grin at the
corner of his mouth. He drew at his cigarette, inhaled
deeply and let the smoke trickle out through his nose.

‘But then, my dear Vadassy,’ he said sweetly, ‘you do
not know all the facts. In particular, you are ignorant of


219




one very important one—the fact that we had discovered
the identity of the spy before you left here three days
ago, that we could have arrested him at any time we
wanted to do so.’

It took me a moment or two to take this in. Then hope
and despair began to chase themselves through my brain.
I looked at him.

‘Who is the spy, then?’

He was leaning back, watching me with obvious interest.
He flapped his hand airily. ‘Oh, we’U come to that later.’

I swallowed hard. ‘Is this another trick?’

‘No, Vadassy, it isn’t.’

‘Then,’ my temper rose again, ‘will you explain what
the devil you mean by—by torturing me like this? If
you knew what I’ve been through these last three days
you wouldn’t be sitting there like a fat, complacent slug,
grinning as though it were a good joke. Do you know
what you’ve done to me? Do you realise, damn you? You
—you ...’

He tapped me on the knee. ‘Now, now, Vadassy! This
is a waste of time. I know that I am fat, but I am certainly
not complacent. Nor am I a slug. What I have done I
have had to do, as you will see if you will give me time to
explain instead of losing your temper.’

‘Why have you arrested me? Why are you keeping me
here?’

He shook his head protestingly. ‘Just be quiet, my good
Vadassy, and listen. You’ve broken your cigarette in your
emotion. Have another.’

‘I don’t want a cigarette.’

I watched him, cold hatred in my heart, while he lit
his second cigarette. When he had done so he sat for a
moment staring at the match-stalk.


220







‘I was quite sincere,’ he said at last, ‘when I apologised
to you. I had a job to do. You will see.’

I was about to speak, but he waved me into silence.

‘About nine months ago,’ he went on, ‘one of our agents
in Italy included in his report news of a rumour that the
Italian Intelligence Department had established a new
base in Toulon. In my business, of course, we hear many
such rumours, and I paid little attention to this one at
the time. Subsequendy, however, I was compelled to take
it seriously. Information about our defences along this
coast was finding its way into Italy with disconcerting
regularity. Our agent in Spezia, for instance, reported that
particulars of a secret change in the fortifications of an
island near Marseilles were being freely discussed by
Italian naval officers three days after it was made. Worse,
we had absolutely no clue to the source of this informa¬
tion. We were very worried. When that chemist walked
in here with those negatives we seized the opportunity
with both hands.’ Dramatically his fat, baby-like hands
tightened on an imaginary object.

‘Naturally, you came under suspicion. When, how¬
ever, we found out what had happened, how the cameras
had been changed, we discarded you as unimportant. To
be truthful, we nearly released you then and there. Fortu¬
nately,’ he added blandly, ‘we decided to wait for a few
hours until the report on the camera came in.’

‘Report on the camera?’

‘Oh, yes. You see, that is something else you do not
know about. As soon as we knew of the change we tele¬
phoned to the makers of the camera and asked who had
bought the particular camera with that serial number. The
reply was that it had been supplied to a dealer in Aix.
The dealer in Aix remembered it quite well. As luck


221



would have it, he was a small man and it was the only
camera of that value he had sold for two years. He had
had to get it specially, and was able to supply us with
the name of the man who had bought it. The namf> cor _
responded with that of one of the guests at the Reserve.
Meanwhile we had had the photographs examined by an
expert. He was able to tell us by the position of the
shadows that the photographs had been taken at about
half past six in the morning, and that they had been taken
with a telephoto lens attachment from a certain angle.
Reference to the map, plus the fact that in some of the
photographs portions of foliage were visible, showed that
the photographer could have been in only one place. That
place was a small, high headland, almost unapproachable
except by sea.

‘We consulted the fishermen in the harbour. Yes, the
man in question had taken Koche’s boat out at five o’clock
on the previous morning. He had said that he was going
fishing. One fisherman remembered it because, usually,
when Koche or his guests went fishing, this fisherman
would go with them to bait the hooks and look after the
engine. This particular guest had preferred to go alone.

‘So, we had our man. We could arrest him. The Com-
missaire was impatient to do so. But we did not arrest
him. Why? You will remember, no doubt, that when
I was talking to you in that cell I said that I was not
interested in spies, but in who employed them. That was
so. I was not interested in this one man. We had h ea rd
of him before, and his dossier showed that he had always
been an employee. I was interested in his headquarters
at Toulon. Him I could arrest at any time I chose; but
first I wanted him to lead me to his superiors. To bring
that about I must in some way force him to leave the











Reserve, yet at the same time let him think that he
hims elf was completely unsuspected.’

‘And then, I suppose, you thought of me?’

‘Exactly. If you started making inquiries about cameras
he would know what had happened to his photographs,
realise that your suspicions were aroused, and go before
you decided to approach the police. Then we should
follow him. The only difficulty was persuading you to do
this without giving anything away. Again fortune favoured
us. Your passport was not in order. You had no national
status. The rest was easy.’

‘Yes,’ I said bitterly, ‘it was easy. But you could at
least have told me that you knew who the spy was.’

‘Impossible. For one thing, it would have appeared to
have weakened our case against you, and you would have
been more difficult to handle. Secondly, we could not
afford to rely on your discretion. You might have confided
in someone else. Your behaviour towards the man might
have been unnatural. It was a pity, because, acting in
what you conceived to be your own interests, you dis¬
obeyed instructions. What has worried us more than the
failure of those instructions was, first, the fact that your
room had been searched and, second, the attack on you
last night. It meant, so we thought, that the man was
proving difficult to scare. He must have found out that
the cameras had been changed, of course. And he would
know it was you who had his camera. He would have
seen you with an identical type. The trouble was, I see
now, that he thought you didn’t know about the photo¬
graphs. Or,’ he glanced at me shrewdly, ‘did you do
something that I don’t know about?’

I hesitated. In my mind’s eyes I saw myself sitting in
the writing-room, listening to the clock ticking, and staring


223



into a mirror until suddenly the door slammed and a key
turned in the lock. I met Beghin’s eyes.

‘There’s nothing important that you don’t know about.’

He sighed. ‘Well, perhaps it does not matter. That is
past. We come to the report of the robbery. Frankly, my
dear Vadassy, I was a little sorry for you. It was an un¬
pleasant thing for you to have to do. But it was necessary.
The man who searched your room and took the two spools
of film would know that he had taken nothing else. Your
report of valuables stolen would puzzle him. He would
be suspicious. But the situation deteriorated too quickly.
We had to take more drastic measures. Hence your arrest
this evening.’

‘You mean that I am not really under arrest.’

‘If you were under arrest, Vadassy, you would not, as I
have already pointed out to you, be sitting here talkin g
to me. You see, my good friend, we had to force his band ,
But we had to do it carefully. The agent who arrested
you was told to make it clear why you were being arrested.
If Duclos had not asked, the agent would have announced
that the charge was espionage. Now put yourself in this
man’s place. You know that the photographs you have
taken have fallen by chance into another person’s hands.
What do you do? You try to get them back. Having
failed, and suspecting that this person is playing some sort
of game, you decide to wait. Then this person is arrested
by the police on a charge of espionage. What do you
think? What runs through your mind? Firsdy, that the
police have discovered that the photographs have been
taken, secondly, that this person may, in defending him¬
self, lead the police to you. It is time, therefore, for you
to go. What is more, you have no time to lose. You
understand?’


224




‘Yes, I understand. But supposing he does not leave?
What then?’

‘The question does not arise. He has left.’

‘What?’

He glanced at the clock on the wall. ‘Twenty-five past
ten. He left the Reserve ten minutes ago in a car he hired
from the garage in the village. He was heading for Toulon.
We will give him a few more minutes. We have a car
following. A report should reach us soon now.’ He lit his
third cigarette and flicked the match across the room.
‘Meanwhile I have some instructions for you.’

‘Indeed!’

‘Yes. For obvious reasons it is not desirable that any
charge of espionage should be made just yet. The news¬
papers must not get too inquisitive. I propose to make
the arrests on a charge of theft—the theft of a Zeiss Con-
tax camera, value four thousand five hundred francs. Do
you see?’

‘You mean that you want me to identify the camera?’

‘Exactly.’ He stared hard at me. ‘You can do that, can’t
you?’

I hesitated. There was nothing else for it. He would
have to know the truth.

‘Well?’he said impatiently.

‘I could have identified it.’ I felt myself getting red.
‘There is only one difficulty. The camera now in my
room at the Reserve is my own camera. The cameras
were re-exchanged.’

To my astonishment, he nodded calmly. ‘When did it
happen?’

I told him. Again that faint smile puckered the comers
of his mouth.

‘I thought as much.’

225

p



‘You what? 5

‘My dear Monsieur Vadassy, I am not a fool and you
are painfully transparent. Your careful avoidance of the
subject of the cameras on the telephone this morning
was very obvious. 5

‘I didn’t think— 5

‘Of course you didn’t. However, as you have already
found, the two cameras are very much alike. It would be
an understandable mistake on your part to identify the
camera we hope to find at Toulon as your own property,
wouldn’t it?’

I agreed hastily.

‘And, of course, if the mistake is discovered later, you
will be suitably apologetic?’

‘Of course.’

‘Very well, that is settled. He got to his feet. ‘And,’ he
added genially, ‘I see no reason why, if all goes well, you
should not be able to leave for Paris tomorrow in time
for your exigent Monsieur Mathis on Monday.’

For a moment I did not realise what he was saying;
then, as the meaning began to filter into my brain, I
heard myself babbling incoherent thanks. It was as if I
were waking from a nightmare. There was that same
almost overpowering sensation of mingled relief and fear:
relief that it was, after all, only a nightmare, fear that it
might, after all, be real and that the awakening was the
dream. Fragments of the nightmare still lingered. I was
afraid, afraid to trust myself to think. This was merely
another trick of Beghin’s, a trap, a means of gaining my
confidence. My thanks died on my lips. He was watching
me curiously.

‘If you are telling me the truth,’ I said sharply, ‘if you
do mean what you say, why don’t you let me go now?


226



Why can’t I go until tomorrow? If you have no charge
against me, you cannot keep me here. You have no
right to do so.’

He sighed wearily. ‘None at all. But I have already told
you that your assistance is required for identification
purposes.’

‘But supposing I refuse?’

He shrugged. ‘I cannot compel you. We should have
to manage without you. There are, of course,’ he added
thoughtfully, ‘other considerations. You mentioned, I be¬
lieve, that you had applied for French citizenship. Your
attitude in this matter might make all the difference
between the success or failure of your application. The
French citizen is required to aid the police if requested
to do so. A man with so little appreciation of the respon¬
sibilities of citizenship as to refuse that aid ...’

‘I see. More blackmail! ’

One of his chubby hands rested on my shoulder. ‘My
dear good Vadassy, I have never come across anyone so
given to quibbling over words.’ The hand left my shoulder,
went to his inside pocket and came out with an envelope
in it. ‘Look! You have spent three days at the Reserve
at our request and upon our business. We wish to be
fair. Here is five hundred francs.’ He thrust the envelope
into my hand. ‘That will more than cover the extra ex¬
pense. Now then, we ask you to spend an hour of your
remaining time here in helping us to arrest the men
responsible for all your troubles. Is that unreasonable?’

I looked him in the eyes.

‘You avoided the question just now. I ask it again. Who
is the spy?’

He caressed his loose jowl thoughtfully and glanced
at me out of the corner of his eye. ‘I am afraid,’ he said




slowly, ‘that I have purposely refrained from telling you.
I am afraid, too, that I have no intention of t ellin g
you now.’

‘I see. Very clever. I shall have to come with you and
see for myself. And then I suppose I shall be expected to
make this false identification of the camera. Is that it?’

But before he could reply there was a sharp knock at
the door and an agent came in, nodded meaningly at
Beghin, and went out again.

‘That,’ said Beghin, ‘means that our man has passed
through Sanary. It’s time we went.’ He walked to the
door and looked back. ‘Are you coming, Vadassy?’

I slipped the envelope into my pocket and stood up.

‘Of course,’ I said, and followed him out of the room.


228




i8

At ten forty-five that night a big Renault saloon swung
out of the short side road leading from the Commissariat
and sped east along the main coast road.

In the car besides Beghin and myself were two plain¬
clothes men. One was driving. The other I had recognised
as he had sat down beside me in the back. It was my
friend of the limonade gazeuse. He refused steadfasdy to
remember me.

The clouds had gone. The moon, high in the sky,
shed a light that made the beams of the headlamps seem
pale. As we left the outskirts of St Gatien, the hum of the
engine rose in pitch and the tyres slithered on the wet
road as we rounded the ‘S’ bends beyond the Reserve
headland. I leaned back on the cushions, trying to resolve
the chaos of my thoughts.

Here was I, Josef Vadassy, a man who, not two hours
before, had been resigned to the loss of his work, his
liberty, and his hopes, calmly sitting in the back seat of a
French police car on its way to catch a spy!

Calmly? No, that was not quite true. I was anything
but calm. I wanted to sing. And yet I was not quite sure
what I wanted to sing about. Was it the knowledge that
tomorrow, in almost exactly twenty-four hours’ time, I
would be sitting in a train nearing Paris? Or was it that
soon, tonight, I was to learn the answer to a question,
that my problem was to be solved for me, without


229




a pencil and paper? I worried over these alternatives.

I think that all this was part of my body’s reaction to
the tension of the last three days. All the evidence points
to that conclusion. My stomach rumbled incessantly. I
was very thirsty. I kept lighting cigarettes and then pitch¬
ing them out of the window before I had smoked them.
Also, and this was most significant, I had that curious
f iling of having forgotten something, of having left some¬
thing behind in St Gatien, something that I should need.
All nonsense, of course. I had left nothing in St Gatien
that could have been the slightest use to me that night
in Toulon.

The car hummed on through moonlit avenues of trees,
Then we left the trees behind and the country became
more open. There were plantations of olives, their leaves
a silvery grey in the light of the headlamps. We flashed
throu gh villages. Then we came into a small town. A man
in the square shouted angrily at us as we shot past him.
‘Soon,’ I thought, ‘we shall be at Toulon.’ I had a sudden
desire to talk to someone. I turned to the man beside
me.

‘What was that place?’

He removed his pipe from his mouth. ‘La Cadiere.’

‘Do you know who it is that we are going to arrest?’

‘No.’ He put his pipe back in his mouth and stared
straight ahead.

‘I’m sorry,’ I said, ‘about the lemonade.’

‘I don’t know what you’re talking about.’

I gave it up. The Renault swung to the right and
accelerated along a straight road. I stared at Beghin’s head
and shoulders outlined against the glare of the head¬
lights. I saw him light a cigarette. Then he half turned
his head.


230



‘It’s no use trying to pump Henri,’ he said. ‘He is
discretion itself.’

‘Yes, I see that.’

He threw the match out of the window. ‘You spent
four days at the Reserve, Vadassy. Haven’t you any idea
of the man we’re going to arrest?’

‘None.’

He chuckled wheezily. ‘Not even a guess?’

‘Not even a guess.’

Henri stirred. ‘You’d make a bad detective.’

‘I sincerely hope so,’ I retorted coldly.

He grunted. Beghin chuckled again. ‘Be careful, Henri.
Monsieur has a forked tongue in his head and he is still
angry with the police.’ He turned to the driver. ‘Stop at
the poste at Ollioules.’

A few minutes later we entered the town in question
and pulled up outside a small building in the square. A
uniformed agent was waiting at the door. He walked over,
saluted, and leaned through the window of the car.

‘Monsieur Beghin?’

‘Yes.’

‘They are waiting for you at the junction of the main
road and the road from Sablettes, Monsieur. The car
from the garage at St Gatien returned five minutes
ago.’

‘Good!’

We drove on again. Five minutes later I saw the rear
light of a stationary car on the road in front of us. The
Renault slowed and came to a standstill behind it. Beghin
got out.

A tall thin man was standing by the side of the car in
front. He walked towards Beghin and they shook hands.
For a moment or two they stood talking, then the tall


231



man walked back to his car and Beghin returned to the
Renault.

‘That is Inspector Fournier of the dock police,’ said
Beghin to me as he climbed in. ‘We are going to his
territory.’ He slammed the door and turned to the driver.
‘Follow the Inspector’s car.’

We moved off again. Soon now the lines of trees
through which we had been driving since Ollioules thin¬
ned and we passed a factory or two. Finally we swung
on to a brightly lighted road with tram tracks down the
centre and cafes on the pavements. Then we turned to
the right and I saw the name ‘Boulevard de Strasbourg’
on the corner building. We were in Toulon.

The cafes were full. Groups of French sailors strolled
along the pavements. There were many girls. A hand¬
some young coloured woman with a picture hat and a
tight black dress walked serenely across the road in front
of us, causing our driver to brake hard and swear. An
old man was wandering along in the gutter playing a
mandolin. I saw a dark, fat man stop a sailor, say some¬
thing to him, and receive a shove that sent him cannon¬
ing into a woman with a tray of sweets. Farther down we
passed a naval patrol going in and out of the cafes warning
the sailors that it was time to get down to the tenders
waiting to return to the warships. Then we came to a
less frequented part of the Boulevard and the car in front
slowed down and turned to the right. A moment or two
later we were threading our way cautiously through a
network of dark, narrow streets of houses and steel-
shuttered shops. Then the houses became less frequent
and there were whole streets lined only with the high
blank walls of warehouses. It was in such a street that
we eventually stopped.







‘We get out here,’ said Beghin.

It was a warm night, but as I stood on the damp cobbles
I shivered. It may have been excitement, but I think that
it was fear. There was something eerie about those blank
walls.

Beghin touched me on the arm.

‘Come on, Vadassy, a litde walk now.’

Ahead of us the Inspector and three other men were
standing waiting.

‘It’s very quiet,’ I said.

He grunted. ‘What do you expect at this time of the night
among a lot of warehouses? Stay in the rear with Henri
and don’t make a noise.’

He joined the Inspector and the three men fell in
behind him. Henri and I brought up the rear. The drivers
remained at their posts.

At the end of the walls we turned into a street that
twisted out of sight a few metres farther down. On the
right-hand side was the end wall of the warehouse along¬
side which the cars were drawn up. On the left was a
row of old houses. They were three storeys high and
mostly in darkness. Here and there, however, slits of light
gleamed through closed shutters. The moon cast indeter¬
minate pools of shadow along the cracked stucco walls.
Somewhere, in one of the upper rooms, a radio was
croaking out a tango.

‘What happens now?’ I asked.

‘We just pay a call,’ whispered Henri. ‘It’ll be quite
polite. Keep your mouth shut now or I’ll get into trouble.
We’re getting close.’

The street had narrowed still more. As we rounded
the bend I felt the cobbles begin to slope downwards.
Dimly, I could see that there were once more high blank


233







walls on both sides of us, walls reinforced with tall con¬
crete buttresses. Suddenly, in the shadow of one of the
buttresses, I saw something move.

My heart leaped. I gripped Henri’s arm.

‘There’s somebody there! ’

‘Keep quiet,’ he muttered. ‘It’s one of our men. We’ve
got the place surrounded.’

We walked on a few metres. The ground became level
again. Then I saw a gap in the wall on the right. It looked
like the entrance to one of the warehouses, a way for
trucks. The men ahead melted into the shadows. As I
followed, I felt the cobbles give way to cinders. I paused
uncertainly.

‘Get into the side,’ hissed Henri, ‘to your left.’

I obeyed cautiously and my outstretched hand en¬
countered a wall. There were no longer any movements in
front. I looked up. The walls rose like the sides of a deep
canyon to a wedge of starry sky. Suddenly the beam of a
torch cut through the darkness ahead and I saw that the
others were standing before a wooden door in the side
of the left-hand wall. I moved forward. The torch lit up
the surface of the door. On it were painted the words:

AGENCE MARITIME, F. P. METRAUX.

Beghin grasped the handle of the door and turned
gently. The door swung inwards. Henri prodded me in
the back and I moved forward after the others.

Inside the door was a short passage terminating in a
steep flight of bare wooden stairs. A naked electric light
on the lan din g above cast a cold glare on the flaking plaster
wall. The Agence Metraux did not appear to be very
prosperous.

The stairs creaked as Beghin began slowly to walk up

234


them. As I followed, I noticed that Henri, just behind
me, had taken a large revolver from his pocket. The call
was evidently not going to be quite as ‘polite’ as Henri
had prophesied. My heart thumped in my chest. Some¬
where in this drab, smelly, sinister building there was a
man I knew. Not half an hour ago he had walked up
these stairs, the stairs beneath my feet now. Soon, in a
moment or two perhaps, I should meet him again. That
was the part that was so frightening. He could do no
harm to me and yet I was frightened. I wished suddenly
that I had a mask to conceal my face. Stupid, yes. And
then I began to wonder which it would be. I saw their
faces as they had stood watching me when I had been
‘arrested’—scared, shocked. Yet one of them, one of
them ...

Henri prodded me in the back and motioned to me to
keep up with the man in front of me.

On the first landing Beghin stopped in front of a heavy
wooden door and tried the handle. It opened easily and
the light revealed an empty room, the floor of which was
strewn with slabs of plaster fallen from the ceiling. He
paused to wipe off the sweat glistening on his forehead
and neck, and led the way on up the stairs.

He had nearly reached the top of the second flight when
he stopped again, and motioned us to wait. Then he and
the Inspector stepped on to the landing out of sight.

In the silence I could hear the watch ticking on the
wrist of the man in front of me. Then, as the silence
intensified, my ears caught a faint murmur of voices. I
held my breath. A moment later the Inspector’s head and
shoulders appeared over the banister rail above, and he
signalled us on.

The landing was a duplicate of the one below. There



was, however, no light. Very quietly the men ranged
themselves in front of the door. I found myself pressed
against the wall beside it. The voices were louder now
and, although the actual words were too indistinct to
identify, I could hear that the owner of one of the
voices—a man—was speaking Italian.

I saw Beghin’s hand go towards the handle, hesitate,
then grasp it firmly and turn.

The door was locked; but the slight ratde of the handle
had been heard inside. The voices stopped suddenly.
Beghin swore under his breath, and rapped loudly on
the door panels. There was dead silence from the room.
Beghin waited a moment, then turned round quickly to
Henri. Henri held out his revolver butt foremost. Beghin
nodded and took it. Turning to the door again, he
thumbed back the hammer of the gun, and put the
muzzle diagonally against the keyhole. Then he squeezed
the trigger.

The noise of the explosion was deafening. For a
moment the door held. Then two of the detectives
flung their bodies against it, and it flew open with a crash.
My ears singing, I stumbled in after them.

It was a small room furnished as an office, but with
an iron bedstead in one comer. There was nobody in it.
One the far side, however, there was another door. With
a shout the Inspector dashed across to it and flung it open.

The far room was in darkness; but as the door flew
inwards the light from the pendant in the office flooded
across to a window in the end wall. From the darkness a
woman screamed. The next instant a man dashed to the
window, threw it open, and flung his leg over the sill.

It all happened in the fraction of a second. The man
was at the window almost before the Inspector had

236




recovered his balance. Out of the comer of my eye 1
saw Beghin raise the revolver quickly. Simultaneously the
fnan at the window turned, and his arm shot out. There
was a flash and a roar. I heard the bullet thud into the
Inspector’s shoulder a split second before Beghin fired.
> There was a tinkle of glass, and the woman inside the
room screamed again. Then the window slammed. The
man had gone. But in the instant that he had turned to
fire, I had seen his face and had recognised him.

; It was Roux.

I saw the Inspector lean against the doorpost, his face
contorted with pain. Then I dashed after the others into
the further room.

! Cowering white-faced and whimpering in the corner
; was Mademoiselle Martin. Beside her, his hands raised
t above his head, stood a thickset bald-headed man pro¬
testing angrily in rapid Italian that he was an honest
businessman, a friend of France and that, as he had done
nothing criminal, the police were not entitled to interfere
with him.

Beghin had gone straight to the window. His bullet had
smashed one of the panes of glass, but of Roux there was
no sign. Over Henri’s shoulder I caught a glimpse of
the roof of an adjoining building about two metres below.

Beghin turned quickly.

‘He’s got clear over the roofs. Duprat, Marechal, look
after these two here. Mortier, you get down to the
street, and warn the men there to keep watch on the roofs
and shoot on sight. Then come back and see what you
can do for Inspector Fournier; he’s wounded. Henri,
come with me! You, too, Vadassy, you may be useful.’

Sweating and cursing, he heaved himself over the sill
and dropped to the roof below. As Henri and I followed.


237




I heard the Inspector weakly exhorting the detective,
Mortier, not to stand there gaping like a fool, but get
down to the street as he had been told.

I found myself standing on a low parapet running round
the four sides of a flat roof with a skylight like a cucumber
frame in the centre. Around it rose the blank walls of )
the adjoining warehouses. In the shadows cast by the j
moon it looked as though there was no exit from the
roof. But Roux had completely disappeared.

‘Have you a torch?’ snapped Beghin to Henri. !

‘Yes, Monsieur.’

‘Then don’t stand about. Get over to the skylight and
see if it can be opened from this side. And for God’s
sake hurry.’

As Henri jumped down on to the leads to obey,
Beghin started walking round the parapet. I could hear
him muttering curious oaths as he went. Then I saw
what he was making for. In the shadow at the far comer
of the roof there was a narrow gap between the con¬
verging walls. As he turned his torch on it, Henri called
over that it was impossible for a man to escape through
the skylight. A second after he spoke there was a stab of
flame and a report from the darkness ahead, and a bullet
smacked viciously into the brickwork behind me.

Beghin knelt down and lowered himself on to the
leads. I followed suit. Bent double, Henri scuttled across
to us out of the shadows.

‘He is beyond the corner, between the two walls,
Monsieur.’

‘I know that, imbecile. Keep down, Vadassy, and stay
where you are. Henri, get across to the wall, and work
your way towards the gap, under cover. If you see him
shine your torch on him. We’ve got him cornered.’

238 I







Henri hurried away and Beghin, revolver raised, started
to walk slowly along the leads towards the gap. A small
cloud obscured the moon for a second or two, and I lost
sight of him. A second later there was the flash of a torch,
and a moment after two shots crashed out in quick suc-
' cession. The flashes came from the comer by the gap. As
the echo of the shots died away, I heard Beghin calling to
Henri not to go any farther.

Unable to resist the temptation any longer, I followed.
As I reached the corner I nearly bumped into Beghin,
who was peering cautiously into the pitch-black shaft
between the walls.

‘Did you see him ?’ I whispered.

‘No. He saw us. You’d better get back, Vadassy.’

‘I’d rather stay here, if you don’t mind.’
t ‘Then don’t grumble if you get shot. He’s on a fire-
escape about twenty metres along the wall round this
corner. It’s the back wall of a warehouse in the street
running parallel to the one we came along. Henri, you
get back, and tell them in the street to get some men on
to that warehouse. If the watchman is still asleep, tell
them to break in. I want them to take him from the rear.
And tell them to be quick about it.’

Henri crept away. We waited in silence. In the distance
there were the sounds of a train shunting and of cars
on the boulevard. Near at hand it was deadly quiet.

‘Supposing he slips away before ...’ I began at last.

He gripped my arm. ‘Shut up and listen!’

I listened. At first I could hear nothing, then, a very
faint grating noise came to my ears. It was an old sound,
I hollow and metallic. Beghin drew in his breath sharply,
i I saw him edge forward to the comer of the brickwork.
! I bent down and moved forward until I could just see




over the parapet. Suddenly the beam of his torch shot out
into the darkness. The beam swept over the concrete on
the opposite side of the shaft. Then it stopped and I saw
the fire-escape.

Roux was nearing the top of it. As the torch caught
him he looked round quickly, and half-raised the revolver ?
in his hand. His face was white, and he blinked in the ;
light. Then Beghin’s gun crashed out. The bullet hit the
escape with a clang, and whined off into space. Roux
lowered his gun and raced for the top. Beghin fired again,
and ran forward along the guttering between the walls to
the foot of the escape. I hesitated for a second before
following him. By the time I reached the fire-escape he ;
was halfway up. I could see his bulk against the sky, a
shadow moving slowly across the wall. I went up after
him.

A moment later I was sorry that I had done so, for 1
saw a movement against the skyline.

Beghin stopped and called down to me to go back. At
the same moment Roux’s bullet hit the rail near my feet.
Beghin fired back, but Roux was no longer visible. The
fat man clattered up the last few stairs. When I caught
up with him he was raising his head gingerly over the
top of the ledge r unnin g round the roof. He swore softly.

‘Has he got away?’ !

Without answering me, he stepped over the ledge to j
the roof.

It was long, narrow, and quite flat. Near us was a
large water-tank. At the far end was a triangular struc¬
ture containing the door leading below. Between was a
forest of square steel ventilating-shafts. Beghin drew me
into the shadow of the tank.

‘We shall have to wait for reinforcements. We should


240






never find him among those ventilators, and he could
snipe us if we tried it.’

‘But he may get away while we’re waiting.’

‘No. We’ve got him here. There’re only two ways off
this roof—the fire-escape and that door over there. He’ll
probably try to shoot his way out. You’d better stay here
when the men arrive.’

But there was another way off the roof, and Roux was
to take it.

We did not have to wait long. Almost as soon as
Beghin had finished speaking, gardes mobiles with rifles
were pouring on the roof through the door. Beghin
shouted to them to spread out, and advance towards us.
They obeyed promptly. The line began to move. I waited
with bated breath.

The line had almost reached the last row of venti¬
lators, and I was beginning to think that Roux must, after
all, have given us the slip, when suddenly I saw a figure
dart from behind the ventilators and make for the ledge
opposite us. A garde shouted and raced in pursuit. Beghin
ran forward. Roux leaped up on the ledge and steadied
him self for an instant.

And then I understood. Between the roof on which we
stood and that of the next warehouse was a space of about
two metres. Roux was going to jump for it.

I saw him crouch for the take-off. The nearest garde
was about twenty metres from him, working the bolt of
his rifle as he ran. Beghin was still farther away. Then
Beghin stopped and raised his revolver.

He fired just as Roux was straightening his body.
The bullet hit him in the right arm, and he half-turned.
Then he lost his balance.

It was horrible. For an instant he struggled to save

241

Q




himself. Then, as he realised that he was falling, he cried
out.

The cry rose to a scream as he disappeared, a scream
that stopped abruptly with the sound of his body hitting
the concrete below.

I watched Beghin walk over to the ledge and look
down. Then, for the second time in twenty-four hours,

I was violently sick.

When they reached Roux, he was dead.

‘His real name,’ said Beghin, ‘was Verrue. Arsene
Marie Verrue. We’ve known about him for years. He is
— was — a Frenchman, but his mother was an Italian. He
was bom at Brian?on, near the Italian frontier. In 1924 he
deserted from the army. Soon after, we heard that he was
working as an Italian agent in Zagreb. Then, for a time,
he worked for the Rumanian army intelligence service.
Afterwards he went to Germany for some other govern¬
ment, probably Italy again. He came here on forged
papers. Anything else you want to know?’

We were back in the office of the Agence Metraux.
Inspector Fournier had been taken away in an ambulance.
Detectives were busy transferring all the papers, files,
and books in the office to a van that had been sum¬
moned for the purpose. One man was engaged in ripping
open the upholstery of the chairs. Another was prising
up the floorboards.

‘What about Mademoiselle Martin?’

He shrugged casually. ‘Oh! She was just his woman.
She knew what he was up to, of course. She’s down on
the poste now. We’ll question her later. I expect we shall
have to let her go. The one I am glad to get is Maletti,
or Metraux, as he calls himself. He’s the brain behind


242




all this. Roux was never important, just an employee.
We shall get the rest soon. All the information is here.’

He went over to the man at work on the floor, and
began to examine a bundle of papers that had been found
below the boards. I was left to myself.

So it was Roux. Now I knew why his accent had
seemed so familiar. It was the same accent as that of my
colleague Rossi, the Italian at the Mathis School of
Languages. Now I knew what Roux had been talking about
when he had offered me five thousand francs for a piece
of information. It had been the hiding-place of the photo¬
graphs that he had wanted. Now I knew who had hit
me on the head, who had searched my room, who had
slammed and locked the writing-room door. Now I
knew, and it did not seem to matter that I knew. In my
ears was still that last agonised shriek. In my mind’s eye
I saw Mademoiselle Martin and the dead spy standing in
front of the Russian billiard table. I saw her pressing
against him. But ... Roux was never important ... just
an employee ... she was just his woman. Yes, of course.
That was the way to look at it.

An agent came into the room with a package in his
hand. Beghin left his papers and opened the package. In¬
side it was a Zeiss Contax camera and a large telephoto
lens. Beghin beckoned to me.

‘They were found in his pockets,’ he said. ‘Do you
want to see the number?’

I looked at the camera in his hand. The lens and shutter
mechanism were crushed sideways.

I shook my head. ‘I’ll take your word for it. Monsieur
Beghin.’

He nodded. ‘There’s no point in your staying any
longer. Henri is downstairs. He will take you back to St



Gatien in the car.’ He turned once more to his papers.

I hesitated. ‘There’s just one more thing, Monsieur
Beghin. Can you explain why he should have stayed on at
the Reserve, trying to get his film back?’

He looked up a trifle irritably. He shrugged. ‘I don’t
know. He was probably paid only for results. I expect he
needed the money. Good night, Vadassy.’

I walked downstairs to the street.

‘He needed the money.’

It was like an epitaph.


244



19

It was nearly half past one when I arrived back at the
Reserve.

As I walked down the drive, I noticed that there was
a light in the office. My heart sank. According to Beghin,
the St Gatien police had explained the situation to
Koche, and prepared him for my return; but the prospect
of discussing the affair with anyone was one I could not
face. I tried to slip past the office door to the stairs, and
had my hand on the banisters when there was a move¬
ment from the office. I turned. Koche was s tandin g at the
door smiling at me sleepily.

‘I have been waiting for you, Monsieur. I had a visit
from the Commissaire a short while ago. He told me,
amongst other things, that you would be returning.

‘So I understand. I am very tired.’

‘Yes, of course. Spy-hunting sounds a tiring sport.’ He
smiled again. ‘I thought you might be glad of a sandwich
and a glass of wine It is here, ready, in the office.’

I realised suddenly that a sandwich and some wine was
precisely what I would like. I thanked him. We went into
the office.

‘The Commissaire,’ he said as he opened the wine, ‘was
emphatic but evasive. I gathered that it is most important
that no hint of Roux’s real activities should get about.
At the same time, of course, it is necessary to explain
why Monsieur Vadassy is arrested on a charge of espionage


245






yesterday, and yet is back again today as if nothing has
happened.’

I swallowed some sandwich. ‘That,’ I said comfortably,
‘is the Commissaire’s worry.’

‘Of course.’ He poured out some wine for me, and took
some himself. ‘All the same,’ he added, ‘you yourself will
have to answer some embarrassing questions in the
morning.’

But I refused to be drawn. ‘No doubt. But that will
be in the morning. All I can think of now is sleep.’

‘Naturally. You must be very tired.’ He grinned
at me suddenly. ‘I hope you have decided to forget our
interview of this afternoon.’

‘I have already forgotten it. It was hardly your fault.
The police gave me orders. I had to obey them. I didn’t
like doing it, as you may imagine, but I had no alternative.
They threatened to deport me.’

‘Ah, so that’s what it was! The Commissaire didn’t
explain that.’

‘He wouldn’t.’

He took one of my sandwiches and chewed for a
minute or so in silence. Then:

‘You know,’ he said thoughtfully, ‘these last few days
have worried me.’

‘Oh?’

‘I once worked in a big Paris hotel as assistant manager,
The manager was a man named Pilevski, a Russian. You
may have heard of him. He is, in his way, a genius. It
was a pleasure to work with him, and he taught me a
lot. The successful restaurateur, he used to say, must
know his guests. He must know what they are doing,
what they are thinking, and what they are earning. And
yet he must never appear inquisitive. I took that to heart.

246


It has become instinctive to me to know these things. But
during. the past few days I realised that there was
something going on here that I did not know about, and
the fact worried me. It offended my professional sensi¬
bilities. Some one person, I felt, was at the bottom of
it. At first I thought that it might be the En glishman
There was that trouble on the beach, to begin with, and
then I found out this morning that he was trying to
borrow money from the rest of you.’

‘And he succeeded, I believe.’

‘Oh, yes. That young American lent him two thousand
francs.’

‘Skelton?’

‘Yes, Skelton. I hope he can afford it. I don’t think he
will see it again.’ He paused, then added: ‘Then there
was Monsieur Duclos.’

I laughed. ‘I actually suspected Monsieur Duclos of
being a spy, at one stage. You know, he’s a dangerous
old man. He’s the most appalling liar, and an inveterate
gossip. I suppose that’s why he’s such a successful
businessman.’

He raised his eyebrows. ‘Businessman? Is that what
he’s been telling you?’

‘Yes. He seems to have a number of factories.’

‘Monsieur Duclos,’ said Koche deliberately, ‘is a clerk
employed in the sanitary department of a sma ll munici¬
pality near Nantes. He earns two thousand francs a month,
and he comes here every year for two weeks’ holiday.

I heard once that a few years ago he spent six months in
a mental home. I have an idea that he will soon have to
return to it. He is much worse this year than he was last.
He’s developed a new tendency. He invents the most
fantastic stories about people. He’s been badgering me


247








for days trying to get me to handcuff the English
major. He says he’s a notorious criminal. It’s very
trying.’

But I was getting used to surprises. I finished the last
of the sandwiches and got up. ‘Well, Monsieur Koche,
thanlr you for your sandwiches, thank you for your wine,
thank you for your kindness, and—good night. If I stay
here any longer I shall spend the night here.’

He grinned. ‘And then, of course, you would have no
chance of evading their questions.’

‘Their questions?’

‘The guests, Monsieur.’ He leant forward earnestly.
‘Listen, Monsieur. You are tired now. I do not want to
worry you. But have you considered what you are going
to say to these people in the morning?’

I shook my head wearily. ‘I haven’t the slightest idea
Tell them the truth, I suppose.’

‘The Commissaire ...’

‘To hell with the Commissaire!’ I said explosively.

. ‘The police created the situation. They must accept the
consequences.’

He got up. ‘One moment. Monsieur. There is some¬
thing that I think you should know.’

‘Not another surprise, surely?’ ■ i

‘Monsieur, when the Commissaire arrived tonight, the
P.nglisTi couple, the Americans and Duclos were still in
the lounge discussing your arrest. After he had gone I
took the liberty of inventing an explanation of your arrest
that would clear you of all suspicion of any criminal activity
and at the same time satisfy their curiosity. I told them
in the strictest confidence that you were really Monsieur
Vadassy, of the counter-espionage department of the
Second Bureau, and that the arrest was merely a ruse,

248







part of a special plan about which not even the police
knew anything definite.’

I was startled. I gaped. ‘And do you expect them to
swallow that nonsense?’ I asked at last.

He smiled. ‘Why not? They believed your story about
the theft of the cigarette-case and the diamond pin.’

‘That was different.’

‘Agreed. Nevertheless, they believed that, and they
believed this. They wanted to believe it, you see. The
Americans liked you and didn’t want to th i nk of you as a
criminal, a spy. Their immediate acceptance of the story
convinced the rest.’

‘What about Duclos?’

‘He claimed that he had known it all along, that you
had told him.’

‘Yes, he would claim that. But’—I looked at him
squarely—‘what was your object in telling this story? I
don’t understand what you’re getting at.’

‘My idea,’ he said blandly, ‘was simply to save you
trouble and embarrassment. Monsieur,’ he went on per¬
suasively, ‘if you will sleep soundly tonight, if you will
keep to your room in the morning, if you will leave the
affair in my hands, I can promise you that you will have
to answer no questions or give any explanations. You
will not even have to see any of these people.’

‘Now, look here—’

‘I know,’ he put in quickly, ‘that it was most imper¬
tinent of me to tell them this without your permission,
but under the circumstances—’

‘Under the circumstances,’ I interrupted him acidly, ‘a
theft, an arrest, and a violent death all in one day would
have been bad for business, so you got in first with a
cock-and-bull story about my being a counter-espionage


249








agent. Roux is politely forgotten. The police are happy. 1
am caught between two fires. Either I have to go on lying
like a trooper and explain what the famous counter¬
espionage agent is doing back at the Reserve or I have
to crawl out without anyone seeing me. Nice work! ’

He shrugged. ‘That is one way of looking at it. But I
should like to ask you just one question. Would you prefer
to make up your own explanation?’

‘I should prefer to tell the truth.’

‘But the police—’

‘Damn the police! ’

‘Yes, of course.’ He coughed a little self-consciously.
‘I shall have to tell you, I am afraid, that the Commis-
saire left a message for you.’

‘Where is it?’

‘It was verbal. He told me to remind you that a citizen
of France must be ready to assist the police on all possible
occasions. He added that he hoped soon to be in touch
with the Bureau of Naturalisation.’

I drew a deep breath. ‘I suppose,’ I said slowly, ‘that
you didn’t, by any chance, discuss your little story with
the Commissaire?’

‘I did, I believe, mention it in passing. But—’

‘I see. You both worked it out between you. You—’
I stopped. A sudden feeling of helplessness swept over
me. I was tired, tired, sick to death of the whole wretched
business. My limbs were aching, my head felt as if it
were falling in two. ‘I’m going to bed,’ I said firmly.

‘And what shall I tell the servants, Monsieur?’

‘The servants?’

‘About calling you, Monsieur. Their present instruc¬
tions are that you are officially no longer here, that your
breakfast will be served discreetly in your room, that when


250





the car arrives to take you to Toulon in time to catch the
Paris train, none of the other guests is to see you leave.
Am I to change those instructions?’

I stood there in silence for a moment. So it was all
arranged. Officially, I was no longer at the Reserve. Well
—what did it matter? In my mind’s eye I saw myself
walking on the terrace the next morning, I heard the
exclamations of surprise, the questions, the cries of
astonishment, my explanations, more questions, more ex¬
planations, lies and more lies. This way was the easier.
Koche knew that, of course. He was right and I was
wrong. Heavens, how tired I was!

He was watching my face. ‘Well, Monsieur? he said
at last.

‘All right. Only don’t let them bring the breakfast too
soon.’

He smiled. ‘You may be sure of that. Good night,
Monsieur.’

‘Good night. Oh, by the way!’ I turned at the door and
drew Beghin’s envelope from my pocket. ‘The police gave
me this. It contains five hundred francs for my expenses
during the last few days. I haven’t spent anything like that
amount. I should like you to give the envelope to Herr
Heinberger. He might be able to make use of it, don’t
you think?’

He stared at me. For a moment I had the curious
impression that I was looking at an actor who with one
movement had wiped the make-up off his face—an actor
who had been playing the part of a hotel manager. Slowly
he shook his head.

‘That is very generous of you, Vadassy.’ He no longer
addressed me as ‘Monsieur.’ ‘Emil told me that you and
he had talked together. I am afraid I was annoyed. I






see now that I was wrong. However, he no longer needs
the money.’

‘But—’

‘A few hours ago, perhaps, he would have been glad
of it. As it is, he is returning to Germany in the morn¬
ing. It was arranged early this evening that they should
leave by the nine o’clock train from Toulon’

‘They?’

‘Vogel and his wife will be going with him.’

I was silent. I could think of nothing to say. I picked
up the envelope from the table and put it back in my
pocket. Absently, Koche splashed some more wine into
his glass, held it up to the light, then glanced at me.

‘Emil always said that those two laughed too much,’
he said. ‘I found them out yesterday. A letter arrived.
They said it was from Switzerland, but it had a German
stamp. While they were out of their room I had a look
at it. It was quite short. It said that if they wanted more
money they must offer immediate proof that they needed
it. They did so. Emil is right. They laugh, they are
grotesque. No one suspects that they are also obscene.
That is her secret.’ He drank the wine and put the glass
down with a bang. ‘In Berlin, years ago,’ he said, ‘I heard
Frau Vogel give a recital. Her name then was Hulde
Kremer; I didn’t remember her until she played to¬
night. I had often wondered what happened to her. Now
I know. She married Vogel. It’s very odd, isn’t it?’ He
held out his hand. ‘Good night, Vadassy.’

We shook hands. ‘And,’ I added, ‘I shall hope to see the
Reserve again.’

He inclined his head. ‘The Reserve is always here.’

‘You mean that you won’t be here with it?’

‘In confidence, I leave for Prague next month.’


252




‘Did you decide that this evening?’

He nodded. ‘Just so.’

As I climbed slowly to my room I heard the clock in
the writing-room strike two. A quarter of an hour later I
was asleep.

At noon that day I drank the remains of my breakfast
coffee, strapped my suitcase together, and sat down by
the window to wait.

It was a glorious day. The sun was pouring down and
the air over the stone windowsill was quivering, but the
sea was slightly ruffled by a breeze. The red rocks glowed.
In the garden, the cicadas were droning. Down on the
beach I could see two pairs of brown legs beyond the
shadow of a big striped sunshade. On the lower terrace.
Monsieur Duclos was addressing some new arrivals, a
middle-aged couple still in their travelling clothes. As he
talked he stroked his beard and adjusted his pince-nez.
The couple listened intently.

There was a knock at the door. Outside was a waiter.

‘The car is here. Monsieur. It is time for you to go.’

I went. Later, from the train, I caught a glimpse of
the roof of the Reserve. I was surprised to see how small
it looked among the trees.

